America's Germany

Amid ruins the occupation army
struggles to bring order out of
the chaos the Nazis left behind

by JULIAN BACH JR.

These excerpts are from America's Germany, (Random House,
$3), the first book by an American on the progress of the U. S.
occupation and on the lives that Americans are leading in Ger-
many. It was written by Julian Bach Jr., an associate editor of
LIFE who, as an Army lieutenant, spent six months in Germany
after V-E Day. Of his book Secretary of War Patterson says, "It
is the best account of what has happened since the surrender."



THROUGHOUT EUROPE today the state of any nation can most
quickly be assessed by determining the availability and serviceability
of its bicycles. Lacking gas, lacking cars, short more often than not of
horses and carts, the best method of transport for which most Europeans
can hope is a bicycle. With a bike a man can pedal to work; he can visit
friends. In a very real sense he is no longer rooted to the immediate neighborhood but is free once more to enjoy all that life offers, if only within
pedaling distance.
In France where bicycles have a value, not only for getting around, but
also as a prop on which pretty girls sit and show off their legs, bikes are at a
premium. On the black market they cost as much as $220, but at least
there is a price. In Holland, Denmark and Belgium the price is about the
same. But it is an interesting and indicative fact about Germany that bicycles are priceless. There is no price. Except for stolen ones, they cannot
be bought. They can be acquired only through exchange. The standard
swap is ten pounds of fat or 600 cigarettes for a bike.
Germany in the Bicycle Age would be an entertaining act in the Human
Comedy if the setting was not so drab and the characters not so dangerous.
It is the embodiment of justice that Ribbentrop's foreign ministry should
lie in ruins. It is equity that a German woman now bends over in the gutted
Wilhelmstrasse, where for generations world domination was plotted in her
behalf, and ties together bits of branches and sticks. But the entertainment
value is lost when you suddenly realize that to a certain extent the future
security of the world depends upon what happens to this woman.
In the suburbs of Aachen you watch a youngster, perhaps aged 6, goose-stepping back and forth by the road every time an Allied truck passes. He
thinks he is being cute. You think so, too, until you remember that unless
he is taught to stop goose-stepping, your son may be doing close-order drill.
At the Armed Forces Network Station in Berlin, six Germans with Ph.D.
degrees and three others with master's degrees now work as technicians for
10 an hour. Obviously they are not working for the money-804 a day-
but to earn a ration of potatoes and bread. Yet for a twist of fate it might
have been they who perfected radar first or helped invent a German atom
bomb.
There is a difference, however, between feeling sympathy and facing the
facts. The facts of life in Germany are grim, It is our responsibility now to
understand them. In essence they make life in Germany look like this:

FOOD-Near Hamburg, in a marshy plot of land, an elderly German in a
business suit takes his cane and clubs a duck to death.
FUEL-Near Wiesbaden a German in dungarees is trying to retrieve a
lump of coal that has fallen off a passing truck. Every time he steps out
onto the main highway a jeep or truck comes along and forces him back.
Finally, on the fourth attempt, he grabs the lump of coal and pockets it.

TRANSPORT- On the autobahn south of Kassel one afternoon there
was an incongruous sight. Standing on the grassy midstrip was a tall,
elderly German in a cutaway, spats and a silk top hat. As he was not
dressed quite in keeping with the Bicycle Age I pulled up and asked him
about the purpose of his rigging. He explained that he was on his way to a
town miles away. "My son is getting married there tonight and I am trying
to get a lift.""

Cramps in the German belly

SOME GERMANS are starving, millions are suffering from malnutrition, while other millions are neither starving nor suffering. The reasons
why there are starvation and malnutrition are simply explained. In peacetime the country as a whole was 85% self-sufficient in food. However,
western Germany-or the area now comprising the Germanys of America,
Britain and France-was only 60% to 70% self-sufficient. This deficit was
made up by imports, especially food shipments from eastern Germany
which normally produces 15% to 20% more food than the people living
there consume. Eastern Germany, in other words, is the one surplus food-producing region; the only one in which, during even normal times, the
people feed themselves. This area is now in the Russian zone or in Polish
hands. No quantity of food has been shipped from there to the other zones
in Germany. The Russians say that there is a food deficit in the area as a
MARKETEERS OFFER CIGARETS AND BINOCULARS FOR A BICYCLE,
result of German scorched-earth policies and months of devastating fighting. Besides, the Russians have their own food shortages at home, occasioned by the German invasions and occupations of both Poland and the
U.S.S.R., and the Red Army forages off the land. Thus there has been no
substantial movement of food from the normally surplus east to the always-
lacking west.
In times of peace, with excellent transport and plenty of coal to manufacture artificial fertilizer and new farm implements, the Germans living
in the U.S. zone might come closer to feeding themselves on a reduced but
healthy ration. But this is not peace. It is the aftermath of a disastrous war.
Transportation and coal are lacking, and there are 4,000,000 extra people
living in the zone. Thus at just the moment when there is less food and
transportation than ever, there are more mouths to feed.
There are many people who would resolve the choice between importing
food from outside Germany and starvation by letting the Germans starve.
The position these people take is something like this. The only good German is a dead German. Starvation will kill off Germans. Therefore let the
Germans starve. This view has perhaps never been more incisively expressed than in a letter which appeared in the Paris edition of the New
York Herald Tribune. The last paragraph said:
"It is funny that this same "pitying of the Germans' which resulted in
another war has not taught Americans a lesson. What does it matter if
20,000,000 Germans starve, whether their dangerous Hitler youth is
exterminated and replaced by other European youth? As Clemenceau
said: There are 20,000,000 Germans too many. Let us say now: There
are 40,000,000 Germans too many' to prevent another war."
But anyone who sentences 40,000,000 people to death is not likely to
bring peace to the world. It was decided on V-E Day, when the Germans
surrendered without conditions, that the indiscriminate killing of Germans
had ceased. Once it is decided that Germans by the million will no longer
be killed, the assumption is that they will be permitted to live. As I see it, this
is the most obvious fact about America's Germany. Perhaps, because it is
8o obvious, it is also the hardest for many people to accept suddenly. But
that is the inevitable logic of events, and the sooner this fact is accept.
ed, the sooner we shall readjust our own thinking so that we can put into
being the Germany which the Big Three leaders decided upon at Potsdam.
For it was at Potsdam that it was decided, not only that the Germans
should live, but how they should live and for what purpose. The "how" is
that they shall live under a military occupation until such a future time
as they represent no threat to peace and are themselves capable of
pursuing a democratic and peaceful way of life. The "purpose" is to make
the Germans themselves want to live at peace with the rest of the world.
It is no longer profitable to devise new ways of killing them. This is especially true if they are to live today so that at some future tomorrow newer
German generations can regain their moral status and rejoin the "family of nations." Starvation, no matter how slow, is one of the least
likely methods of achieving this end. Hungry people rarely make
good democrats.
Thus, if the Germans are not to be faced each winter with starvation, food will have to be imported. We must brace ourselves
psychologically to accept the hard fact that, unless we wish to become Germans ourselves, we are responsible for what happens to
these people who are both in and on our hands. "To look at these
Germans," says an American officer, "and at the same time read
scare stories about 'German starvation' is embittering. After all a
good many thousands of persons pulled through years in concentration camps on a diet of thin soup." Of course they did. But unless we are prepared, as Americans, to reduce ourselves to the
moral level of the Germans and their concentration camps, there
is no alternative but to accept the fact that in governing Germany
we are not running a concentration camp. We hold each German
individually guilty for having allowed concentration camps to exist
and for having thrived while Europe suffered. The responsibility of
the individual for acts performed by him or in his name is the basis
upon which western civilization is built. This same responsibility
governs us-and that part of Germany which we now run.

Berlin butt biz buzzes

SINCE a pack of American cigarets is worth $10 on the Berlin black market, it is not surprising that discarded butts also
have a value in Germany. The collecting, processing and reselling
of these butts is, in fact, a preoccupation of serious importance to
Germans.
Each evening at the station of the Armed Forces Network which
is called "Frankfurt" but is at H?chst, the barber, who speaks
"French" but is German, used to go on a scavenging expedition
when he was finished trimming hair. As a scavenger Fritz set a new
standard in politeness that was a source of constant amusement to
Captain Frank Danzig, the former station manager, who bore with
Fritz in much the same way that other people bear with an overly
polite child to whom they feed candy but whom they would really
like to spank.
After Fritz had swept away the hair on the floor and replaced his
scissors and comb in the little black handbag that he carried, he
moved catlike into the captain's office. As Captain Danzig, like
everyone else in radio, was always on the phone calling distances
never under 500 miles, Fritz tiptoed up to his desk and purred
politely, "Permeltez," This succulent morsel of French had become
such a routine evening snack between Captain Danzig and Fritz that
the American knew precisely to what the German was referring. He
therefore responded with a "oui" and Fritz proceeded to scoop up
every cigaret butt in sight. After he had emptied the ash trays, the
trashbasket and searched, with his hands, under the legs of the
desk, he placed the butts in the little tin box, which he carried for
this purpose, and, with a final "merci," tiptoed out. A moment
later the unnmistakable accent of Fritz was heard in the next office
down the hall as he purred, "Permettez,
A cigaret butt in German is a stummel. Stummeling is for many
Germans a major business. I am not, when I say this, trying to be
facetious. Collecting stummels in the Bicycle Age in Germany is a
very serious way of making a living-if you happen to be German,
Each butt has a definite value, depending naturally upon its size.
A discarded cigaret that has not been burned is worth 8 marks
(80?). If half-burned its value is reduced but considerable: 1
mark or 10e. The smallest stummel is worth 30 pfennings or 3 ?.
In Berlin particularly the business of collecting and processing
these butts is organized. As Variety might put it: BERLIN BUTT
BIZ BUZZES. Schoolchildren, working after class, collect butts
for their parents or for the combine for which they work. Children
will sometimes follow a soldier smoking a cigaret for blocks in the
hope that they can be in on the discard. The most favored collectors, however, are not children or even subway employes who
sweep the tracks and platforms for butts, but the waiters in cafes
frequented by Allied troops. A study, seriously made at several
cafes on the Kurf?rstendamm, revealed that no ash tray containing a butt remained on a table for more than 45 seconds before the
waiter scooped it up. Sometime the operators, for whom the waiters work, resell the tobacco by the can. A single small can costs up
to 120 marks ($12). One Berlin stummelmann, shrewder than the
rest, got even higher prices for a time by pasting labels on the cans.
The labels read, "Imported American Tobacco."

Night descends on Germany


THE MOOD of Germany in defeat is reflected in the nocturnal
habits of our subjects. In the summer months they sat listlessly,
rarely conversing, in twos and threes on the benches in the parks.
In winter they sat listlessly at home. A spirit of resignation is reflected in the great increase in fortunetelling. "More and more
people," says a burgomaster, "are putting their fate in the hands
of fortune-tellers. In Erding a dairy hand set himself up as a
fortune-teller. He had 70 customers the first evening." The troops
of all four occupying powers have been struck by the "docility" of
the population-in keeping with the German tendeney to scrape in
defeat and bully in victory. Householders ordered out of their
homes on 3 to 48 hours' notice oblige to the extent of helping their
conquerors move the furniture and apologize for a wall cracked by
bomb blast or the failure of a radiator to work for lack of furnace
fuel. Those Germans working as servants to the occupiers can't do
enough. American troops are supposed to carry arms in public.
After V-E Day and for several weeks, everyone did. Then, when
the docility of the natives became apparent, pistols and carbines
were put on the shelf.
Now pistols and carbines are being taken down again. Our subjects, restless and resentful, are beginning to stir. In Berlin, in par-
ticular, there have been occasional shots at night (not all by
Germans). A few cafes, movie houses and the Sala vaudeville
open in the late afternoon and close by 9 or 10. There are two
nightclubs, the Femina and the neon-lighted Monte Carlo. The
cover charge is only a few cents but a bottle of cognac at the Monte
Carlo costs $60 to $70 in occupation marks. That is not saying
much, because the Germans and Americans and other Allied soldiers who spend that sum can recoup it in black-market dealings
the next day.
At the Femina there is a quiet floor show and a good jazz band.
Mostly there are American and British officers and men alone, or
with nurses, Wacs or fraulein dates. A few of the girls have upswept hair and silver foxes strangling their necks, but to imagine
that the Femina is a newer Babylon is to miss the point. Eight
MPs keep law and order in the place, and the Femina shuts down
at 9:30 p.m.
Seven girls sit on high stools behind the bar, "pouring" out
drinks that have to be rediscovered with a microscope. A few sips
of "Mocha Brandy" costs $3.90. "Strawberry Wine" cocktail costs
$1.70. It is the least expensive refreshment in the house.
Sometimes after closing time there is a little unscheduled activity in the pitch-black streets around the Femina. I know, because
the last time I left there a German, hiding in a darkened ruin,
threw a rock through the right front window of the car.

New schools for very sour "Krauts"

THERE IS REASON to believe that many living Germans are
"beyond hope." There is no doubt also that among the 2,000,000
children of school age in America's Germany there are some very
sour "Krauts."
The kids are in a muddle. They find themselves holding on to a
multitude of Nazi beliefs which were drummed into them, and now
the activities for which they felt they were trained-soldiering,
Hitler Youth leadership, Nazi politics-no longer exist. Obviously
within the space of a few school months there has not been time
for Military Covernment, working through selected German teachers and books, to convert the kids to a new series of ideals and ambitions more in keeping with the realities of German life in the
Bicycle Age. The start made by the Education Division of Military
Government has, however, been solid. The first earth has been
turned by way of preparing German schoolchildren for an acceptance of democratic beliefs. No matter how pessimistic one may feel
concerning the chances of teen agers accepting this new orientation, it is more desirable to have them back in school studying non-Nazi, though imperfect, texts under non-Nazi teachers whose
worst fault at present is their indifference, than to have these children loitering dangerously on the streets.
The goal, of course, is to rebuild the German educational system
from the boiler room up so that as quickly as possible democratically minded German teachers will be educating students to the
value of a more cooperative way of life. As Germany has been the
least cooperative of all nations, the task is sizable. To achieve it is
one of the prime purposes of the occupation. If it is successful,
German thinking will be revolutionized to the extent that for the
first time in 80 years Germans may become a people fit to live at
peace with the rest of the world.
Three milestones have already been passed along this long, uncharted road. The first mile was a hard push: to find suitable non-
Nazi texts (but in the German language) quickly. The second mile
was another hard push: to reopen the schools by fall, although
American educators had only the summer months in which to
work-and often hostility with which to contend. The third mile
was no breather cither: to throw out the Nazi teachers and still
have enough politically reliable teachers on hand to instruct the
classes due to begin. To have accomplished most of this between
V-E Day and Oct. 1 is a record of which Americans should be proud.
The "new" German texts in use in the schools are far from
perfect. German educators are therefore being encouraged to write
new and up-to-date texts with a suitable democratic orientation,
and when such manuscripts become available, Military Government plans to have the local German authorities produce and
distribute them.
Finding suitable teachers to serve in this same period of transition has been another problem. Few non-Nazi teachers existed in
Germany after twelve years. The de-Nazifying of the German
schools had by November resulted in the dropping of 70% of all
the former teachers in America's Germany.
Meanwhile, on the bookshelves of German homes and stores,
"something new has been added"-and much more has been taken
away. Mein Kampf and every other Nazi book and pamphlet are
verboten. Householders may possess them (we are searching homes
for firearms but not books), but bookstores may no longer sell
them and libraries may no longer carry them. As Nazi influence
colored nearly every field of thought, almost every book, pamphlet,
magazine, play, film, newspaper and tract printed in Germany during a period of 12 years has had to be banned.
As a result bookstores are half empty and booksellers have been
ransacking attics for classics, truly scientific treatises, atlases,
almanacs and even cookbooks. The authors formerly banned are
now best-sellers: Thomas Mann, Jack London, Theodore Dreiser.
All told, the works of 2,200 authors, not all necessarily Nazis, have
been barred. Similarly in the field of music all German marching
songs, the Nazi Horst Wessel Lied and The Watch on the Rhine are
banned, and compositions by composers previously taboo, like Mendelssohn, Tchaikovsky, Offenbach and Shostakovitch are now in
vogue.
Eventually book publishing will undergo the same transition as
the press with the conditional licensing of enough German publishers to give Germans new reading matter. Several church groups
have been licensed to publish Bibles and catechisms, and the first
conditional license to publish nonreligious books was granted to a
Heidelberg publisher whose anti-Nazi background is beyond
dispute. His first titles are translations of Emerson's essays,
Franklin's Autobiography and Poe's The Gold-Bug.

Justice to a hair

THE FRAULEINS are called "furlines" or "fraternazis" by American troops. A man going out tells his roommates, "I'm goin'
frattin'." The number of men who have fallen into the ""furline"
habit can only be guessed. My own estimate, based on six months
of travel around Germany, would be that 60% of the men in some
units, 10% of the men in other units fraternize.
From their Yankee boyfriends the girls have picked up extra
food, cigarets, a few illegitimate children and an increasing
amount of slang. A girl with whom Americans associate is likely to
look at the snowy weather and say, "It's rugged." If kidded, she
may come back with the familiar "Straighten up there, pilot, and
fly her right."
Fraternization, far from having become a dead issue, is today
more complicated than ever. This is due to the appearance on the
scene of the German male. Last summer young German men were
mostly locked up as PWs. But now they are returning to civilian
life and they do not like to see their girls consorting with their
conquerors. Their anger is taken out chiefly against the girls, some
of whom have been beaten up by their countrymen or have received threats or have had their heads shaved. A typical antifraternization poster, addressed to "GERMAN WOMEN!" and put up in
one night by boys as young as 12, said:

What German women and girls do,
Makes a man weep, not laugh.
One bar of chocolate only or one piece of
Gives her the name German whore. ..

When such a woman should desire a German husband,
She should go to hell.
The devil does not want such creatures and will
Throw them on the dung, thinking,
"Dirt belongs to dirt."

There is more at stake here than the mere question of how Germans react to the sight of Americans with German girls. The significance was aptly expressed by a girl whose name appeared on a
poster and who told me later, "The fellow who made
must have been a great Nazi, perhaps a jilted man or married guy.
In any case he hasn't realized that times have changed." That is
the point. The extent to which German men accept "fratting" is
the thermometer which registers the degree to which they accept
defeat, contain their national pride and look forward to a new and
more congenial way of life. Obviously the sight of a German woman
with an American conqueror enrages an unreconstructed" German more than a German who is anxious to cooperate with us.
There is also a democratic right of some significance at stake.
However sordid love over a chocolate bar and box of salt-water
tafly may be, it does represent the right of two human beings freely
to pick their own associates. This inalienable democratic freedom
has perhaps never been more precisely expressed than by a former
lawyer, a Captain Rutherford, who served as U.S. legal officer in
Heidelberg. It was before Captain Rutherford that the first trial of a 
German boy, accused of clipping the hair of a fraternizing
"furline," was held in America's Germany.
The accused was 20; he had just been discharged from a prisoner
cage and he was standing in the railroad station at Heidelberg
watching a fraulein and her sister talking to a GI. As he watched,
his resentment mounted. When the American left he rushed over
to the fraulein, seized her and, with a pair of nail scissors, began to
cut off her hair. Her sister, terrified, ran out of the station to call
the American MPs. Meanwhile, embarrassed possibly by the
screams of his struggling victim, the young ex-soldier stopped cutting the girl's hair in so public a place and gave her instead ten
minutes in which to go and cut it off herself. Before she could
either succumb to or further defy his threat her sister returned
with the MPs and the German was arrested.
Captain Rutherford heard this evidence. Then he turned to the
accused standing before him and in a quiet voice passed judgment
on the first case of its kind to be tried in America's Germany.
"We Americans," he said, "believe that every individual has
the right to pick his own associates. In seizing this girl and then
cutting off some of her hair and ordering her to cut off the rest
you were trying to take away this freedom from her.
"Frankly, in deciding now how to punish you, I have no precedent to guide me. But I take the view that had your plan succeeded,
this girl would today be hairless. I have therefore asked several of
your fellow-German women how long it would take them to grow
back their hair if their heads were shaved. The answers they gave
average out to nine months. I am therefore sentencing you to jail
for nine months."

GIs look at Germans

THE REACTION of our troops to Germany is clear and definite.
The majority do not like Krauts. But they prefer them to many
Europeans they have met. A preference assumes that some other
people are detrimentally involved. These people are unfortunately
and chiefly the French. Thus the GI reaction to Germany can be
put this way: He likes Germany because he does not like France.
To understand this, it is necessary to remember that the GI believes what he sees. He is not "intellectual. He is not an
"analyst." If he feels uncomfortable and finds that he gets this
feeling while he is in France, he takes it out on the French. He
does not ask why. or whether his reaction is "fair." When he is comfortable and finds that he has this better feeling in a place called
Germany, he chalks one up for the Krauts. He does not ask
whether the comforts of Germany have anything to do with the
discomforts of France.
Most Americans who have been stationed in Germany during
this past year first fought through or were stationed in Belgium
and France. Aside from Paris and the rest centers of the Riviera,
most GIs did not like France at all. Especially in eastern France,
where the wars, because of the Germans, are fought, most villages
compare unfavorably with Tobacco Road. This was war. But to the
average GI this was also "France." The "40 and 8" was French.
The mud was "French." The rain was "French." All he believed
was what he saw, all that he saw was undeniably "French" and he
did not like it.
When the GI, therefore, hit Germany what did he see and how
did he react? He saw a country which, in comparison with his view
of France, was "spick-and-span." He found people living in ruins
but trying hard to appear clean. He himself moved into the very
best houses and apartments. He was out of the mud which he had
associated with France and in a clean bed which he immediately
associated with Germany. He smelled less manure in the countryside and found more sidewalks in the cities. As the highest praise
that most Americans feel like bestowing on anything foreign is,
"It's clean!" he was surprised and pleased with Germany's physical plant.
As he sat over his coffee (and complained about the British sit-
ting over their tea), an American in Germany could ponder also
about the "industriousness" of the natives. That the Germans like
to work even more than we is a phenomenon that has struck everyone. Mop in hand, Br?nhilde is content. Shovel in hand, Sieg.
fried, if not content, is at least no longer forlorn. Americans, who
like hard work, have a tendency to respect the even harder-working
Germans.
Finally, there is a "reserve" about the Teuton that appeals to
many Americans because it parallels their own. Unlike the French,
Germans are not excitable (except when they blow up the civilized
world). Neither do they shout or shriek (except when a Hitler
tells them to). Also soldiers with "furlines" sometimes get a sharp
"no." "That, says some men, ¡°makes us respect the fraulenins 
more than the 'madam-moysels. "
It is possible as new and green replacements arrive direct from
the States that they will like Germany less. Normally the worry
is that these troops, having never "seen the war," will be even
more sociable with the Germans. But since these troops will be arriving direct from the clean bathrooms of America, the parkways
and the neon-lighted hamburger joints, I suspect that they will
not like Germany or the Germans at all. For the comparison in
their minds will not be between Germany and France but between
Germany and the U.S. And in that comparison there need never
be a fear.

The forest from the trees

THE AMERICANS occupying Germany have all the weaknesses of
Americans everywhere-but also all the strengths. They are the
same people, and in the upper brackets many of the same faces,
who won their share of the war and do not propose to lose their
share of the peace. Within one year, working from scratch, in a
sea of ruins, in an enemy country, with a strange language, and
with only the failure of 1918-1933 to guide them, these Americans
have prevented mass starvation, epidemics and serious unrest.
They have reopened the schools and brought some slight order,
when possible, to industrial chaos. They have de-Nazified America's Germany, helped by a strong wind of criticism, to a tremendous extent; given German agriculture a sound basis for future
crops; guarded, sorted and begun to return the largest mix-up of
art and treasure in history; supervised the commencement of
local, county and provincial self-government; reintroduced a better standard of justice and a freer press than the Germans have
known for a long time; and despite criticism (sometimes justified)
returned 5,451,000 displaced persons to their own frontiers. This
number, representing five-sixths of the total DPs, were returned
within five months after V-E Day. This was six months ahead of the
most optimistic schedule. Much remains to be done. But it is always
a sound point to remember that after 1919 it took Hitler 14 years
to plant the tree of Nazism in Germany, that after 1939 it took six
years for the Allied world to chop it down, and that it will now
take an even longer time to dig out the roots.
















