Russian Reconstruction 


From a Special Correspondent 


The year 1946 was one of achievement for the Soviet Union and also of disappointment. It was the first complete year of peace after what Stalin has called " the cruellest war in Russian history." Demobilisation, reconversion, reconstruction were the order of the da3t. The Communist Party, somewhat eclipsed by the army during the war, re- asserted its claim to political leadership. In February the elections to the Supreme Soviet, in which the new republics and territories in the west incorporated since 1940 took part, brought some 101,500,000 voters to the polls, more than 100,000,000 of them voting for the Communist and non-party bloc. In March the new Five- Year Plan was introduced, foreshadowing that by 1950 the Soviet Union would not only have made good its losses but would have far outstripped the prediction of 1940 in every field. But in the later half of the year new anxieties, internal and external, began to colour public pronouncements. The report of Zhdanov, deputizing for Stalin at the twenty-ninth anniversary cele- bration in November, was noticeably more sombre in tone than Stalin's own utter- ances earlier in the year. When the moods and policies of Soviet statesmen abruptly change, the reason is often not far to seek. Western observers sometimes forget that a large part of the world still lies within a zone where a good, mediocre, or bad harvest may mean the difference between abundance, tightening the belt, and famine. Russia under the Tsars and through the early years of the revolution was well within this zone. In the later nineteen-thirties, with agriculture collectivized and partially mechanized, she was beginning to emerge from it. The disaster of the war temporarily thrust her back into it. 


DESTRUCTION IN UKRAINE 


The optimistic mood of the winter of' 1945-46, and especially Stalin's pro- mise in February that rationing would be abolished " in the nearest future " and that special attention would be given to "expanding the production of consumer goods and raising the workers' standard of living by a systematic lowering of prices," were predicated on the expectation of a good harvest. Unfortunately, this expectation was not fulfilled. In the first place, as Zhdanov officially confirmed in his report, the har- vest was affected by drought in a number of regions." Secondly, and probably more important, the progress of recovery and reconstruction in the Ukraine had been seriously over-estimated. The Ukraine, a relatively small area on the map, contained before 1941 more than one-fifth of the in- habitants of the Soviet Union, nearly 40 per cent. of the land under food crops, and almost as large a proportion of the total livestock population. The whole of this fertile area was engulfed in the Ger- man occupation and exposed to systematic ruin. Of the estimated 10,000,000 civilian casualties of the war a majority must have fallen on the Ukraine; and of the 25,000,000 rendered homeless a still higher proportion were Ukrainians. To set agri- culture on its feet again in this devastated area was a larger and more arduous task than had. been supposed in the first enthusiasm of victory. The task of Soviet agricultural policy has always been twofold-to raise pro- duction, thus counteracting the decrease in efficiency inevitably resulting from the break-up of the large estates in 1917, and to secure that out of this increased pro- duction adequate supplies of food reached the towns and the factories. Collectivization was the solution which killed both these birds with one stone. It brought the tractor and the combined harvester to the countryside and it provided a system through which the Government could with comparative smoothness control prices and draw off surpluses in the form of taxation. The Germans not only broke up collective farming throughout the Ukraine: they also, by way of anti-Soviet propaganda against the Soviet Government, fanned what was left of the old peasant animosities against collectivization and linked this with a campaign among the Ukraine intellectuals in favour of Ukrainian nationalism. Even in this most recalcitrant of all the constituent republics of the Soviet Union the Germans obtained little success; for their own policy of requisition and devastation left them with no great scope to conciliate the local population. But the disorganization, political as well as material, which they left behind them was a serious impediment to rapid recovery in this vital agricultural sector. Nor were the inroads into the collective system confined to the regions actually occupied by the enemy. Throughout the central and eastern provinces of European Russia the military emergency had for four years dominated everything; and emergency measures had often dispersed the property and broken up the organization of the collective farms. The return of the demobilized soldiers must have increased the confusion. These conditions, added to the weather, were responsible for the poor harvest. On September 19 a decree was issued in the joint name of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. (as the former Council of the People's Commissars is now called) and the central committee of the party, signed by Stalin and Zhdanov, " on measures for the liquidation of breaches of the Statute of the agricultural artel in the collective farms." 

PENALTY FOR FAILURE 


The abuses listed in the decree are the wastage of work-days," the " spoliation of Kolkhoz common lands," the " dispersal of Kolkhoz property," and the " breach of the democratic principles of Kolkhoz administration." Some of these abuses are said to have " acquired a mass character," and not only party and State workers 1but local organizations were involved. The Soviet system recognizes no accidents. Where things have gone wrong, or optimistic forecasts have been falsified, someone is clearly to blame. It may be guessed-indeed there are some positive indications--that a fairly extensive purge has been in progress among those responsible for the failure to maintain or restore order in the collective farms. The counterpart of these measures on the side of production has been a tightening of the consumer's belt. The abolition of rationing has been officially postponed from 1946 to 1947. The issue of preferential ration cards to certain categories of workers has been reviewed-here, too, abuses are said to have crept in. New restrictions have been put on the issue of ration cards to " dependents," though here the motive may have been not so much to reduce consumption as to force idle hands on to the labour market. Meanwhile the prices of rationed foodstuffs have been raised (and commercial prices for " free " supplies reduced), though workers in the lower categories have been compensated for this by an increase in wages. 

PROSPECTS ON THE LAND 

Whatever else may be in store, it may be taken for granted that the prospects of the next harvest are already a primary concern of Soviet policy and that many of the best party workers and organizers will be concentrated in this field. Until the collective organization of agriculture -the essential key to the Soviet economy is fully reestablished, until a good harvest or a series of good harvests, has restored the foundations of internal security and well-being, Soviet policy, domestic and foreign, will remain in an uneasy phase. This does not mean that the stability of the regime or the position of the Soviet Union in the world will be threatened. The Soviet people and their leaders have immense resources of endurance and power which were tested but not exhausted by the war. But only when these pressing anxieties of everyday life can be over- come, only when belts can be again re- laxed (as they were in the middle thirties), will the Soviet Union once again turn a confident and less mistrustful face on the capitalist world. 
One important condition of recovery is an increased production of consumer goods, both in its direct effect on a population long starved even of the most primitive amenities of life and in its indirect effect of stimulating food production by offering adequate inducements to the grower. But here, too, the optimistic fore- casts of last winter were clouded by un- toward developments of the second half of the year. 


Russian Reconstruction 

II Man-power for industrial recovery 

From a Special Correspondent 

Stalin's promise of an expansion of the production of consumer goods was reflected in the announcement of the new Five-Year Plan in March. Although, in accordance with precedent, the production of capital goods-and especially the en- gineering industries-came first, the new plan also aimed at" securing an abundance of the principal items of consumer goods in the country." The Press began to hold out hopes of more and better clothes, shoes, crockery, household utensils and other necessities and amenities. Cycles, motor-cycles and even small cars for the civilian population were said to be on the way. Particular emphasis was laid on the peaceful nature of the policies served by the fourth Five-Year Plan. 
Once, more, however, as in the thirties, when similar hopes were entertained of the second Five-Year Plan, dis- appointment was int store. The Soviet Union is not the only country where the cease-fire bred a premature conviction of difficulties overcome, and where the relief and optimnism of the first winter of peace rested on shallow foundations. The immense losses, military and civilian, sustained by the Soviet Union made the labour shortage there especially acute; and skilled labour in particular has always been the main bottle-neck of Soviet industry. Other countries besides the Soviet Union have realized in 1946 that the ultimate determining factor in production is quantity and quality of man-power and that the psychological problems of reconversion are at least as grave as the technical problems. 

LACK OF LABOUR 

Hence it is not surprising that, through- out the latter half of the year, the recruitment of labour has been a burning topic. The military machinery has been scrapped; the " militarization of labour " in the form of labour battalions has been rejected as decisively as when Trotsky first proposed it after the civil war in 1920. But the civilian machinery has been tightened up. In May a new Ministry of Labour Reserves was created to take the place of the old Committee on the Distribution of Labour Power. Since that time much attention has been paid to the enrolment of youth at school-leaving age into trade and vocational schools with a view to their subsequent drafting into industry, which will thus be assured of a continuous intake of more or less trained and sifted workers. Shortage of labour has not been the only bar to rapid industrial recovery. Depreciation of plant and that depreciation of labour efficiency commonly known as war-weariness have been at least as grave in the Soviet Union as elsewhere and have been reflected in rising costs. Internal propaganda has recently been busy on the theme of increased industrial efficiency and lower production costs as the road to higher wages. These measures will have their effect in the long run. But for the moment the civilian population may have to wait some time for the promised abundance of clothes, shoes, and saucepans, and longer still for the motorcycles and people's cars. 

SENSITIVE MEMORIES 

The prospects of the Soviet consumer have, however, been still more radically affected by the international situation. Here, too, the hopes of the first six months of peace faded all too quickly. It would be idle and irrelevant to attempt either to trace the gradual process of deterioration in international relations or to assign causes and responsibilities. Certainly the Soviet writers and broadcasters seized upon Mr. Churchill's Fulton speech in March which, graced by the presence of President Truman, revived the sorest and more sensitive memories of 1919 and evoked an unusually sharp retort from Stalin himself. Discussions on the atomic bomb embittered feeling on both sides. Press polemics grew fiercer; and each side drew unwarrantable conclusions from the Press of the other, while ignoring the tone of its own. During the early phases of this process Great Britain appears to have been regarded in Moscow as guilty of instigating American hostility to the Soviet Union. More recently the picture has changed. and Great Britain figures in the Soviet  imagination as the somewhat unwilling but helpless hanger-on of American capitalism. Whatever the reason or the justification, however, it is certain that, since the spring and early summer of 1946, Soviet policy has once more been concerned with the ultimate necessity of military prepared- ness. It would indeed be an exaggeration to speak of rearmament. Manpower is too urgently needed in the factories and on the land for demobilization to be willingly retarded. The new budget presented to the Supreme Soviet in October cut military expenditure from 128 billion roubles in 1945 to 72 billion roubles in 1946-a reduction which, in face of rising prices, means a cut by at least one half; and the percentage of military expenditure -23 per cent. of total national expenditure-compares not unfavourably with that of other leading countries. Nevertheless, it seems clear that, in the allocation of national resources to industrial production, a larger share than was in- tended in the comparatively hopeful period a year ago will go to building up those industries on which the national strength depends and a smaller share to the satisfaction of the Soviet consumer's immediate needs. This is not a policy of strength: it is rather a policy born of anxiety and apprehension, which 'are expressed diplomatically in the Soviet desire to build up a broad security zone-what someone has called a " cordon sanitaire in reverse round the fringes of their territory. Nor is it a policy of isolation: Soviet attempts at international cooperation, in the U.N. and elsewhere, however clumsy are sincere. As Zhdanov said in his speech, "at the moment when we desire in cooperation with other nations to realize our equal right to participation in international affairs, we are covered with floods of abuse and scandal-mongering"; and the Soviet Union is not the only nation to adopt, in perfect sincerity, airs of injured innocence which seem paradoxical to others. But it is a policy shot through and through with mistrust and anxiety-mistrust inspired by the traditional deep-rooted belief in the hostile designs of the capitalist world, anxiety reinforced by the difficulties of the food situation and of industrial reconstruction. Internal and external factors react on one another: but, other things being equal, it is a fair guess that inter- national mistrust will tend to subside as domestic policy sails into smoother waters. 

PARTY ASCENDANCY 

Meanwhile the party is busy reasserting an ascendancy which it seemed-perhaps only seemed to have lost to the army. The glory has now departed-to recede - into history. Generalissimo Stalin, more strongly established than ever as " our great leader," is now more often called plain Comrade Stalin. The other marshals have for the most part retired into private life loaded with honours and jewel-studded swords. The party stalwarts-Zhdanov, Andreev, Malenkov-are once more in the news. The most serious legacy of the war from the party point of view is an inflated membership of some 6,000,000-or about three times the pre-war figure-of whom one- third at least were admitted in conditions precluding the usual strict tests of competence and ideological orthodoxy. The decree of the central committee of the party of July 26 last, which called for a strengthening of party leadership and party control in public affairs, also de- manded increased strictness in the admission of new members. It would not be surprising if, sooner or later, the decision were taken-not for the first time in party history-to purge the party of its less satisfactory elements. Party resolutions continue to stress the vital importance of education in the principles of Marx and Lenin, and the literary purge recently undertaken with vast publicity in Leningrad was perhaps a contribution to the ideological campaign. Certainly Lenin's conception of a comparatively small party of the revolutionary elite, not engaged in the petty details of State administration, but exercising " control" over it in the Russian (and French) rather than in the English sense of the word, has gone by the board during the war. The process had indeed begun still earlier; but if the party retains its present dimensions it seems bound to lose its distinctive character, though its nominal role may be maintained and its old functions exece7sed more and more exclusively by an inner ring.
