STALIN's
MYSTERY CITIES
OF SIBERIA

By VICTOR A.
KRAVCHENKO

A former Soviet official lifts an iron
curtain you haven't heard about-the
one which hides the gigantic arsenal
being built in the Soviet East. It offers
the key to the Kremlin's true intentions
toward the Western World, he says.

SOMEDAY the Kremlin may be forced to choose
between east and west, between ruling Asia
and ruling Europe. Meanwhile, Stalin and the
thirteen other members of the Political Bureau
are going to do everything they can to dominate
both continents simultaneously. Too many tempting
power vacuums loom on every side for the central
authority of the Soviet Union to reason otherwise.
The Politburo has been able, as a result of the war,
to push the Soviet Union's strategical frontier 600
miles westward to a not so imaginary line from
Rostock on the Baltic Sea to Trieste on the Adriatic. In sprawling Asia, however, the Politburo is
still expanding its strategical frontier.
This is the reason why there have been so many
inspired objections to American intervention in
Japan and China. It is also the reason why the Soviet
Army dismantled and carried away the bulk of
Manchuria's industry. The members of the Politburo want and need time to build up their industrial fortress in the Soviet East to the point
where they can dominate the European-Asiatic
heartland.
They already dominate half of Korea and
most of stripped Manchuria. With the help of the
communists in China and elsewhere, they hope
eventually to gain control of all of Asia without having to relinquish their stranglehold on Europe.
Last July the Politburo inspired the following
theme for reiteration in the Soviet press and its
foreign affiliates:
"American imperialists have planted themselves
solidly in the Far East. They are converting Japan
into a colony, a dependency of American capital.
American imperialists in Japan are attempting to
create a base from which to grab the entire Far
East."
Stalin and his Politburo colleagues understand as
well as Hitler and his cohorts did the strategical
advantage to be gained by accusing your "enemy
of doing what you yourself propose to do. In this
connection, it is worth while to recall the instructions given in 1943-in the midst of the war-to a
certain admiral of the Soviet Pacific Fleet.
"We must convert our Soviet East, the Urals and
Siberia," he was told, "into a powerful steel fist,
abundantly supplied with oil and prepared to strike,
if necessary, like a universal joint, either toward the
east or toward the west...
"After the inevitable victory over German and
Japanese Fascism, the USSR will still be encircled by capitalism. Great clouds will roll up before us in the east...
because the main stronghold
of capitalism, which will fight us in the coming
conflicts, is putting its technical equipment in the
hands of the Chinese reactionaries.
"Not to realize this," the admiral was told,
"would prove our utter ignorance of the future
direction of the political struggle between classes
and systems. The question of Who will conquer
whom?' will be decided by our generation. Which
way China goes, what political and economic forma
it adopts, is a question of immense importance.
Only a Soviet China could clear the atmosphere, and
then only temporarily, for wars will be inevitable as
long as capitalism exists. Our minimum requirements
demand a friendly or Soviet Manchuria." (Italics
mine.)
Prior to the German invasion of the Soviet
Union, V. M. Molotov had told the Eighteenth
Congress of the Communist Party that "the mighty
outpost of Soviet power in the east requires the
greatest possible strengthening.
That the strengthening of the Asiatic industrial
fortress was not only n defensive measure against
Nazi Germany, however, was proved by the announcement last spring of the Fourth Five-Year
Plan. Its official purpose is to "provide
creased facilities for the defense of the USSR and
to supply (its) armed forces with the newest kinds
of technological equipment."
The Politburo has undoubtedly adopted a plan
for obtaining, regardless of means or expense, the
necessary technical knowledge to produce a superabundance of atomic weapons of every sort. Stalin
may minimize the importance of atomic energy in
his speeches intended for domestic consumption,
but he and his fellow members of the Politburo
fully realize its importance.
The region which they have probably selected for
the development of atomic weapons is the Urals,
not only because it is the most likely source of raw
materials but also because it is the present center of
Soviet industry. It is quite possible, however, that
in moving the center of Soviet military
and industrial strength to Eastern Asia
the Politburo will likewise move its
major centers of atomic armament eastward.
The new eastward march of industry
is being accompanied by a complete reorganization of the Soviet governmental
structure. In conjunction with the
Fourth Five-Year Plan, the old Bolshevik institution of the commiasariat
has been abolished. In its place has been
created an entirely new type of ministry,
geared to the future industrial plans of
the Soviet state. Fifty-two ministries
have so far been established to carry out
the Politburo's grand strategy.
The most important of these is the
former NKVD, successor to the Ogpu
and Cheka, which has now been divided
into two ministries. The MVD-Ministry of Internal Affairs-is an all per-
vading super-ministry in charge of enforcing, by every conceivable means, the
dictates of the Politburo. In addition to
its basic police function, the MVD maintains a dozen different agencies, each as
large as any ministry, whose function is
to speed the work of industrialization
by the use of forced labor. The MGB-Ministry of State Security--is charged
with keeping the Politburo informed of
every development, however secret, in
foreign countries, and with preventing the governments of three countries from learning anything
about developments in the Soviet Union.
In a world hungering for peace at almost any
price, the Soviet government is now spending more
money on new military preparations in the east than
it is on the rehabilitation of its devastated areas in
the west. Among the other new ministries created,
three are of particular importance: the Ministry for
the Construction and Development of Heavy Industry, the Ministry for the Construction and Development of Military and Naval Plant, and the
Ministry for the Construction and Development of
Fuel Plant. The appropriation for these three ministries alone amounts to more than 36 per cent of the
total appropriation for all construction during the
course of the current Five-Year Plan. It should be
emphasized that these new ministries are solely concerned with new plant construction and development. They are quite separate from the various
ministries in charge of heavy industrial production
as well as from the Ministry of Armaments, the
Ministry of the Armed Forces and the Ministries of
Oil, Coal and Steel Production.
Each of them, including the Ministry of Armaments, is expanding its Department of the East.
Indeed, coal and oil production have been given two
new ministries each. Instead of the old Commissariat for Oil Production, there is now a Ministry for
Southern and Western Oil Production and another
Ministry for Eastern Oil Production. Instead of one
coal commissariat, there are now two coal ministries, the Ministry for Western Coal Production and
the Ministry for Eastern Coal Production. The
Ministries of Ferrous and Nonferrous Metallurgical
Production are also expanding their Departments
of the East. And there are at the present time
eleven different ministries concerned with the manufacture of machinery, one for each of eleven different phases of industrial planning, each of them emphasizing the eastward march of Soviet industry.
The new Five-Year Plan is thus, principally, an
armaments program designed to make the war-making potential of the Soviet Union fit the Politburo's strategical concept of a "universal joint"
in the heart of Asia. The annual rate of steel production set for the year 1950 is 24,500,000 tons. Of
this amount, approximately 16,000,000, or two
thirds, will be produced in the Soviet East, Of the
250,000,000 tons of coal demanded for 1950, approximately 180,000,000, or almost two thirds, will
be produced in the east. And of 34,500,000 tons of
oil, 16,900,000, or almost half, will be produced in
Asiatic regions to the east of the Caucasus-Caspian
area, which is the present center of the Soviet
petroleum industry.
The Ukraine, once the center of Soviet industry,
has now been definitely relegated to a secondary
position in terms of both steel and coal production.
The Caucasus will remain for many years the principal source of Soviet oil, but it will gradually be
losing way from now on to new petroleum developments in the east.
Although prospecting is now going on all over
Siberia, Sakhalin Island is the area, at present, set for
the most intensive exploitation of eastern petroleum
and coal. The coal reserves of this large island, the
southern half of which was acquired from Japan
in the war, are known to be enormous. It is intended to use them not only for the further industrialization of the island itself but also for the
development of new industrial kombinats in the Far
Eastern sectors of the Asiatic mainland. The oil
fields on the northern end of the island have been
exploited for years by the Soviet trust known as
Sakhalinnepht. This trust has integrated the production of the former Japanese wells in the south
with those in the north, and is now charged with
increasing the production of both fields.
The industrial expansion of the Soviet East-which extends from the Urals to the North Pacific
Ocean-began in earnest with the Third Five-Year
Plan in 1938. It has continued since the beginning
of the war at an ever-increasing rate. Between 1938
and 1941, more than 1000 new industrial plants
were constructed in the Urals and to the east.
Following the German invasion, more than 1300
older plants in the west were dismantled and shipped
to the east along with the majority of their skilled
workers, Neither plants nor workers will ever be
returned.
According to official announcements, the production of the Urals area, the present center of
Soviet industry, has been increased since the beginning of the war by 360 per cent. The production
of Siberia, exclusive of the Urals, has been increased in the same period by 280 per
cent. The bulk of Soviet production
during the war must be credited to the
development of its Asiatic industry.
Although it is difficult to assess the
role played in this development by the
the Soviet Union, it is safe to say that
of about $2,500,000,000 worth of machinery included in the program almost all was
assigned to the Urals and Siberia. Only
the most modern American machinery
was accepted for Lend-Lease use by the
Soviet Purchasing Commission in Washington. Such machinery is now being
copied and improved on in hundreds of
planta operated by the eleven ministries.
The further development of the Soviet East will depend on a rapid increase
in the mileage of its highways and railroads. More than 26 per cent of the
construction budget of the current Five-
Year Plan will be spent on repairing and
double-tracking some 7800 miles of
existing railroads, the building of 4520
miles of new railroads and the building
of 7200 miles of new highways. The
greater part of the new construction is to
be carried out in the east. Among other
projects, the Five-Year Plan calls for
the completion of a new rail link between Magnitogorak in the Urals and
Stalinak in Western Siberia near the
Outer Mongolian frontier. It also calls for the complate double-tracking of the two transcontinental
lines connecting Sverdlovak in the Urals with Khabarovak and Komsomolsk near the Pacific coast,
And it requires the commencement if not the completion of railroads linking Yakutak, the little-known political capital of Yakutia, with both
transcontinental lines as well as with the new industrial Pacific seaport of Magadan.
Billions of man-days of wok will be required to
realize the Politburo's grandiose scheme, But manpower has never been much of a problem to a regime
which depends for its existence on an organization
like the MVD. And it is the MVD, as usual, that
will be depended upon to provide the slave labor and
slave technical brains required to complete the Five-
Year Plan.

Reluctant Colonists East of the Urals

BEFORE agriculture was completely collectivized, the population of the Soviet east was about
12,000,000. New millions were added to its population when peasants, chiefly from the Ukraine, Don
and Volga regions, were exiled to Siberia because of
their resistance to the collectivization program.
Demobilized soldiers and sailors of the Far Eastern
and Siberian forces were usually prevailed upon to
remain in Asia instead of returning to their homes in
the west. They fulfilled the double function of increasing Siberia's labor reserve and providing a
force of military reserves that could be quickly
mobilized in the event of war. On orders from the
party, the Young Communist League developed a
propaganda to attract young women to
the east in order to increase its birth rate. The
population of the seacoast was increased by the MVD's 
developments and establishment of the Northern Sea
Route from Archangel to Vladivostok. The party
purge of 1938 and the super-purge of 1935-39 added
still more millions to the population of the Soviet East.
Then came the war, when mass evacuations caused
its population to rise still further. Since the beginning
of the war, many hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians, Volga Germans, Caucasians and Crimeans have been deported to Siberia, along with the most of the war prisoners whom the Allies have surrendered to the Soviet EastSince V-E Day. The population of the Soviet Eat is now estimated to exceed 40,000,000 inhabitants. About one third of them are prisoners of the MVD, which farms out their labor through the organization know as Gulag?Central Administration of Concentration Camps. 
Gulag¢®?s administrative staff, which occupies a block of buildings on Kirov Street in Moscow, is larger than that of any other Soviet agency or ministry except the MVD itself. Gulag is headed by Gen. Victor nedosyekin, first vice minister of internal affairs, delegate to the Supreme Soviet and, significantly, a member of its committee for the drafting of laws. nedosyekin is second in importance in the MVD hierarchy only to Lavrenti Beria, now a full member of the Politburo, and who, as vice-prime minister, runs the two Soviet police ministries. 
Under the protection of the Soviet legal system.
Gulag is able to exploit its slave labor on a scale so
vast aa to make Nazi Germany's Organization Todt
seem an amateurism pygmy in comparison. Gulag
provides the labor used by one or another of the
MVD's ten construction organizations, the first and
foremost of which is Gulag itself. The rest of its
slaves are rented on a contract basis to the various
civilian ministries whose operations require especially
cheap and tractable workers. The profits,
which are huge, are pocketed by the MVD,
One of the larger operating dependencies of the
'MVD ia Dalatroy-Far Eastern Construction and
Development-a vertical trust headed by Gen,
Ivan Nikiahev, also a delegate to the Supreme
Soviet, His cheat is literally covered with the medals
awarded to him for increasing the output of his
slaves, Nikishev, assisted by his deputies Prun and
Tsaregradski, controls in tum such Dalatroy subsidiaries
aa Dalugol, the Far Eastern Coal Trust;
Dalnepht, the Far Eastern Petroleum Trust; the
transport and supply administrations of the Far
East, U well as all its

principal admiinistrations, including
their gold-mining, metallurgical and
geological departments. These subsubsidiaries, which constitute vertical
trusts in themselves, in turn control the
steam and electrical power stations
which provide their mines and factories
with power, the farms which supply
their slaves with food, and the quarrying and lumbering enterprises which
provide the materials used in building
their highways, factories, tipples, barracks and stockades.
Approximately two thirds of the
MVD's 20,000,000 prisoners are employed in developing the industries of
the Soviet East. A large share of them
are employed by Dalstroy, by the
organization known as the MVD's
"Own Industrial Enterprises" and by
the industrial-construction dependencies of Gulag itself. Gulag functions
as a sort of totalitarian state within a
state in ruling the majority of the
population of Sakhalin Island and the
peninsulas of Kamchatka and Chukot. The inhabitants of these regions are
known as nevozurashchentsy-"those
who will never return." Although the
oil fields of Sakhalin are exploited by
Sakhalinnepht, a dependency of the
Ministry of Eastern Oil Production,
their slave-labor force is directly controlled by Gulag.
The head of the MVD's Own In-
dustrial Enterprises is Gen. Abram
Zavenyaghin, who, in his capacity as
second vice-minister of internal affairs,
also runs Dalstroy, through Nikishev.
I know Zavenyaghin well. He is a
big fat man with a black mustache and
thinning gray hair. We often met at
the office of Sergo Ordzbonikidze, who,
until his A8sasaination, was the Commissar of Heavy Industry. Zavenyaghin, after his graduation from the
Academy of Mines, became the party
secretary of the Donbas region. He
later directed a number of metallurgical plants in Dniepro-Dzerzhinsk and
Magnitogorsk.
Then he became a member of the
Central Committee of the Communist
Party and, finally, before his demotion
during the purges, vice-commissar of
heavy industry. He managed to escape
heavy punishment for his own "deviations" by denouncing his fellow industrialists.
He was therefore sent to Magadan,
not as a slave laborer "who will never
return, but as a slave-labor boss capable of "regeneration." He was asked
to prove his devotion to the Politburo
by building in record time an industrial city on the site of what was ten
years ago a small fishing port on the
Sea of Okhotsk, about halfway between Vladivostok and the Aleutian
Islands.
There was no labor problem at
Magadan, despite the rigors of its
frigid climate, because everyone from
engineers down to common laborers
WAs a prisoner of the MVD. General
Zavenyaghin was therefore able to
complete his task with honors and thus
win his eventual appointment as vice-minister of the MVD. Today Magadan
is a busy industrial city with a population of more than 1,000,000 inhabitants. It is a center of metallurgical
operations, with planta that manufacture steel and other hard alloys,
electrical-machinery factories, a glass
works, shipyards and a plant which
manufactures gold-mining equipment.
It is now the largest city of the Soviet
Far East, not excepting VIadivostok,
Khabarovak and Komsomolak, but
with the distinction that every single
one of its inhabitants, except for high
officials and a few specialists, is a
prisoner of the MVD.
Not all of the cities of the Soviet
Far East are prison settlements like
Magadan. It is a fact, nevertheless,
that prisoners make up the bulk of the
population of the new cities built from
nothing in accordance with the Politburo's master program.

The nonprisoners, comprising less
than half the labor force available in
the Soviet Far East, are usually settled
in the older cities, once the prisoners
work is done. The prisoners are meanwhile transported to new industrial
sites to repent the process of industrial
pioneering.

It is impossible, however, to distinguish between prison projects and
nonprison projects, because of the fantastically complicated structure of the
MVD. As an outgrowth of its basic
police function, the MVD has set up
B0 many interlocking directorates that
it is safe to say that none of the new
industrial projects of the Soviet East
were developed independently of the
MVD. Just as vast numbers of Gulag
prisoners are employed in non-MVD
enterprises, so some nonprisoners are
employed in the MVD's Own Industrial
Enterprises requiring skilled personnel.

In the autonomous republic of Yakutia, cities like Seimchar, Nizhne
Kolymsk and Sredne Kolymsk are being developed jointly by the MVD and
various civilian ministries. The rich
coal mines of the Kolyma Basin are
being exploited both by Kolymugol, a
trust controlled by the Ministry of
Eastern Coal Production, and by the
coal administration of Dalatroy. The
many deposits of rare metals in this
area, including wolfram and molybdenum, are being exploited both by the
MVD's Own Industrial Enterprises,
which also operates asbestos mines,
and by the Ministry of Nonferrous
Metallurgy. The latter exploits the
vast gold deposits, through its trust,
Kolymzoloto, as does Dalstroy.

Geographically and strategically, Yakutia is to the Soviet Union more or
less what Alaska is to the United
States. The climate is just about the
same. In winter the temperature often
drops to seventy degrees below zero.
Like Alaska, Yakutia has been known
in the past chiefly as a pioneering region whose principal industries were
lumbering, fishing and the mining of
gold. In 1940, of the various Yakutian
gold trusts Aldanzoloto alone was
credited with one fourth of all the gold
produced in the Soviet Union.

Stalin is known to take a personal
interest in gold mining, which is to him
almost a hobby. It is also the most
Becret of all Soviet industrial activitie8
with the exception of military industries and atomic energy. One day in
1932 I was visiting Sergo Ordzhonikidze when Serebrovaki, the chief of
the Central Administration of Gold
Mines, called at his office. In the
course of their conversation, Ordzhonikidze thanked Serebrovski for the
book he had given him and which he,
in turn, had passed on to Stalin. When
Serebrovski had gone, I asked Ordzhonikidze about the book. He told me
it was by Blaise Cendrars, its title was
Sutter's Gold. Ordzhonikidze had
given the book to Stalin, he said, beCause of "the boss'" interest in the
references to gold mining in the works
of Jack London.
But the days when Yakutia's chief
Under the impetus of the new Five-Year Plan the republic will now be-
come the scene of a general industrial
boom.
Although its population is still officially given as 400,000, I happen to
know that the number of MVD prisoners at work in Yakutia as early as
1943 exceeded 800,000. I should there-
fore be much surprised if its population
today is less than 1,500,000.
The capital of the republic is Ya-
kutsk, a city on the Lena River which
was once a center of the czariat exile
system. But the labor output of the
prisoners of the czarist regime was as
nothing compared with the "socialist
progress
amount of land devoted to wheat culti-
vation has been trebled in recent years,
grain is still being sent from Central
Asia to feed the Yakutian slaves of the
MVD.
A highway connecting Yakutsk with
the northern rail line to Komsomolak
and the southern line to Khabarovsk
was completed ten years ago at the cost
of the lives of tens of thousands of
in this field. Although the
It is literally strewn for its
length of 700 miles with the corpses of
its builders.
Under the current Five-Year Plan,
the MVD is preparing to build not only
a railroad south from Yakutak, parallel
to the highway, to connect the city
with both transcontinental lines, but
also a second highway-railroad combi-
nation to connect it with Magadan,
nearly 1000 miles to the east. The
MVD has already studded the entire
republic with strategic airfields.
Between 300,000 and 350,000 pris-
oners are employed by the MVD in the
Transbaikal region in the mines and
factories it operates for the Ministry of
Eastern Coal Production and the Min-
istry of Nonferrous Metallurgy. The
centers of this new industrinl region are
Kyakhta and Petrovsk. Following the
purges of 1939, the migration of non-
prisoners east of Chita was prohibited
without permission of the MVD, The
whole region has since been converted
into a mystery zone whose ultimate
purpose is known only to the high
officials responsible for its develop-
The great natural resources of the
Krasnoyarsk area have made it another
vast center of MVD construction, But
MVD operations are extensive through-
out the entire Yenisei Valley. One of
the largest Soviet operations of the
kind is the "Nickel Kombinat of the
MVD," beaded by Andrei Ponyukov.
This organization exploits the coal,
nickel, copper and platinum deposits
in the vicinity of Norylak and Du-
dinka, near the Arctic mouth of the
Yenisei River, and operates its own
metallurgical planta replete with cok-
ing furnaces and electrical-power sta-
tions. Dudinka, a smaller version of
Magadan, is an important Arctic port
of call for the merchant fleet plying the
Northern Sea Route. The MVD has
recently built two hydrolysis plants in
the vicinity of Kansk and KraBnoyarsk.
The few areas I have touched on are
typical of the industrial development
of the entire Soviet East.
If I have seemed to emphasize the
MVD's role in this tremendous effort
to harness human and economic re-
sources to the ambitions of the Polit-
buro, it is only because the MVD is in-
separable from and indispensable to
the Soviet government's industrial
strategy.
I am certain that the Manchurian
machinery which has been transferred
to the Soviet Union is already being
mot up in numerous new factories with
the help of one or another of the MVD's
industrial dependencies. The machinery will prove of inestimable assistance
in the task of strengthening the Politburo's universal joint.
The various industrial ministries are
also playing their part in the Politburo's feverish effort to develop the
military potential of the Soviet East.
But the Soviet ministries are dominated by the MVD to an even greater
extent than private industrial enterprises were dominated by the American
War Department during the war just
over. The Soviet government operates
in peacetime almost exactly as it operates in wartime. Industries are commanded an armies are commanded, and
it is the MVD which is primarily responsible for enforcing and coordinating the grand strategy of the Politburo. Anyone who wishes to understand the nature and purposes of Soviet
industrial planning must bear these
facts in mind. Otherwise there is nothing to be learned from official Soviet
plans and statistics.
The many industrial dependencies of
the MVD receive their directives from
a secret section of the State Planning
Commission directed by Nikolai Voznesenski, vice prime minister, alternate
member of the Politburo and author of
the economic Nazi-Soviet Pact and the
trade agreements with the Soviet
Union's western neighbors. Sometimes
additional directives are issued by the
Bureau of the Council of Ministers, of
which Lavrenti Beria is a member, but
they are issued only in the absence of
those ministers who are not members
of the Politburo. The MVD is thus an
all-powerful superministry which dominates and checks on the activities of
all other ministries.
The MVD is also in charge of the
security aspects of the industrial development of the Soviet East. There
can be no doubt that its dependencies
are constructing underground factories
of every sort, especially in the more
vulnerable frontier areas near Japan
and China. During the war, regrets
were voiced in Kremlin circles that
the old mines were not redesigned to
serve as plants for the manufacture
and loading of shells, and I believe that
this omission is now being hurriedly
corrected. Railroad tunnels were also
planned to take the place of bridges
across the more important rivers.
When Henry Wallace visited the
areas I have described, he inspected a
number of industrial developments
which are entirely dependent on the
use of slave labor. In his book Soviet
Asia Mission, however, he fails to mention this rather important fact.
Under the impetus of the second
World War, and with the invaluable
help rendered by American Lend-Lease,
the productive might of the Soviet
East has already reached a point
which exceeds the Politburo's wildest
prewar dreams. According to a recent
official announcement, the rate of annual production attained by the end of
the war in the Soviet East alone was
30,000 airplanes, 40,000 tanks and
120,000 artillery units of all types and
sizes. The completion of the current
Five-Year Plan will vastly augment
the war-making potential of the Soviet
East at the certain cost of reducing
Soviet living standards still further,
and at the certain cost of plunging the
world into another war that the Russian people want no more than any
other. But the Politburo's actions in
the east, not its propaganda in the west,
are the key to its real intentions.
THE END























































