Why We Don't Understand Russia

By EDGAR SNOW

Differences in words and word
values underlie much of our misunderstanding of other countries, and today
this applies with special force in the case
of Russia. Words connote one thing
against a unique background of Russian history,
language, culture and Marxist ideology superimposed on Czarist atavisms. They often mean something else when put into an English language enriched through centuries of growth of institutions,
thought and experience not duplicated in Russia.
Only scientists, musicians and chess players can,
as yet, speak across the continents with exact comprehension of each other's moves and methods; political man lacks definitions of even the basic concepts written into our international formulas for the
exigent tomorrow. Yet a fair margin of agreement
on meanings is not unattainable, if we make the
effort. In the long run, it is the end purpose toward
which all conferences with the Russians have been
aimed, from Teheran to the Waldorf Astoria. Without a vocabulary in common we shall fail.
Conflicts of meanings exist in the United Nations
charter itself, as well as in speeches delivered under
its auspices. Take the expression "human rights,"
for which a definition was actually sought in San
Francisco. The Russians wanted "the right to
work" included, which was frowned upon by some,
and both the British and the Russians opposed the
American wish to include "the right to free enterprise; " both also grew perplexed when it was proposed to bring in practically the whole Bill of Rights.
The search was quickly abandoned, for the sake of
expediency, but it was probably a mistake; it is
doubtful if anything more fundamental has been
tackled by the UN since then.
In Paris and London and New York, Messrs.
Molotov, Bevin and Byrnes used the same words
over and over again, and since they never defined
them, the speakers seemed to be saying approximately the same things. But they often concluded in
Acrimonious debate, each suspecting the other of
"insincerity.
Soviet diplomats, Ernest Bevin, a labor boss, but no
Marxist, has said repeatedly, "I can't understand
them," and "I don't understand.
Paris and reporting to Congress, Senator Vandenberg frankly admitted a mutual unintelligibility between Russia and the United States. "For example,
they certainly could not agree," he said, "on a definition of 'democracy,' although this is the objective
both profess."
After quitting his poet as ambassador to Russia,
W. Averell Harriman accused the Russians of violating certain terms, "as we understand them," of armistices made in Eastern Europe. Yet Harriman himself went over every word in those agreements The
explanation seems to be that he and Sir Archibald
Clark Kerr simply signed them without realizing
their implicit authorization of Red Army measures
to which we later had to raise objections.
Molotov may have been technically correct when
be said, "Everybody who can read and write can
understand the Soviet Union," but, in fact, the
significance of his lectures often escapes most Americans because he constantly invokes references to
doctrines unknown to his listeners. One fundamental
trouble is that in America we have no political
theory, but many theories in competition and flux
We are "polytheorists," which means that we have
no state dogma except in ambiguous terms, while
the Russians have one state theory which imposes
unanimity of thought, an accepted system of semantica, a political folklore understood by all.
Stressing the urgent "need for a definition of
liberty," Abraham Lincoln observed in 1864:
"We all declare for liberty, but we do not mean
the same thing. With some the word 'liberty' may
mean for each man to do as he please with himself
and the product of his labor; while with others the
same word may mean for some men to do as they
please with other men and the product of other
men's labor. Hero are two incompatible things called
by the same name, liberty. We still lack a
universal definition of liberty as well as a host of
other words.
Vandenberg complained that ho could not agree
with the Russians on the meaning of "democracy,"
but it is doubtful whether Congress would be able
to agree either, and Vandenberg did not tell us
exactly what he himself had in mind. On the other
hand, there is no reason why senators should not
know what the Stalinist believes. They can refer
to the official Soviet Political Dictionary and find
the word neatly packaged for them.
But I hope no one gets the idea that this discussion
advocates a blanket acceptance of Soviet definitions
or wholesale approval of Soviet practices. Because
the Marxist lexicon differs from Webster is no
justification for abuses which occurred under Red
Army occupation, such as denials of certain freedoms guaranteed by Yalta to the
Arrest and imprisonment without charges or recognized due processes of law and the revival of concentration camps for political prisoners are obviously
not regarded as legitimate even by the Russians
themselves, otherwise there would be no necessity
for elaborate secrecy and denials of NKVD methods of terror.
But definitions did directly affect many of our
disputes over the justification of Soviet punitive
techniques and over application of measures in
Eastern Europe, particularly in the Balkans, which
were provided for in the armistices. My main point
here is simply that if Russians did not observe
ethics to which we try to adhere, part of the fault
lay with our own lack of concise thinking, our diplomats' belated realization that the words employed
meant one thing to Moscow, another to us, and hence
their failure to work out compromises in concrete
terminology at the time agreements were written.
Take the word "collaborator," employed again
and again. Our representatives never defined it
and never seriously examined Soviet definitions in
theory and practice. Similarly, although we fought
a war against "the Fascista," and exchanged the
word in congratulatory
speech after speech with our Allies,
Congress never attempted to define
this enemy that cost us so much blood
and treasure. It is a safe bet that no
two men in Truman's Cabinet would
give the same definition of Fascism today. The only thing certain is that all
of them would reject the following answer, ns supplied by Soviet official
"Fascism: One of the forms of open
bourgeois dictatorship, arising in Italy
after the first imperialist war, and in
several capitalist countries, during a
general crisis in capitalism. Likewise
for another, still in common use: a
manifestation of monopoly capitalism
in its most imperialistic phase,
Those two sentences contain four
Marxist terms, each of which has a long
history and technology behind it. Judging from my own conversations with
our generals, congressmen and diplomats, they are quite unfamiliar with
such terminology, which they dismiss
with contempt as "communist jargon,'
but they assuredly disagree with the
general idea that Fascism is a specific
disease of capitalism.
Quite the contrary. Most of them
pretty generally inform me that there
is no essential difference between Fascism and the Soviet system. They reason that both are dictatorships, both
use similar methods; ergo, they are the
same thing.
Such men would be astounded to
learn that Russians believe that we live
under a form of dictatorship. Theory
teaches them that Fascism is a form of
capitalism; "the American way" is
also a form of capitalism. All capitalist
societies are dominated by the bourgeoisie. And "the forms of bourgeois
states are extremely varied,
Lenin, "but in essence they are all the
same: in one way or another, in final
analysis, all these states are inevitably
the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.¡±
Thus when Molotov and Vyshinsky
and such people spit out common words
like Fascism, imperialism, feudalism,
dictatorship or collaborator, and purr
over favorites like socialism, democracy
and communism, they are not only
talking in Russian but simultaneously
using a second language which is rarely
translated for the American newspaper
reader. They are speaking in "Marxian,"
derived directly from accepted political
scripture replete with precise "scientific phraseology. They know that
everything they say will be checked,
compared, interpreted and annotated
by the Red professors, and that they
must be prepared to reconcile their
utterances with classical doctrine. They
are often less concermed that their
Anglo-American colleagues should understand them than they are that they
should not be misunderstood by the
magistrates at home.
Consider Molotov's precondition for
a treaty with Germany, his reiteration
that we must first clean up "remnants
of German Fascism." To Americans
that may be just a phrase which has become a nauseous clich?. But to any
wrote
phraseology.
Russian Marxist it means in brief: liquldation of the Prussian Junkers and the
landlord system throughout Germany,
distribution of land to the peasants, an
end to the economic power of large and
middle capitalists, state ownership of
important industry, suppression of anti-Soviet elements, and a German regime
observing policies of economic, political and military friendship and collaboration with the USSR.
It doesn¡¯t necessarily follow that
Moscow may not settle for less, but all
the foregoing intention is implicit whenever Molotov demands "eradication of
the remnants of German Fascism."
In 1945 Molotov made the following
statement on foreign policy: "The
Soviet Union has always given first
place to promoting universal peace and
the development of international business relations. While we are living in a
'system of states' and while the roots
of Fascism and imperialist aggression
have not been finally extirpated, our
vigilance in regard to possible new violators of peace should not slacken, and
concern for the strengthening of cooperation between peace-loving powers
will continue to be our utmost duty.
Read as we understand it, that was a
simple expression of desire to co-operate
with the United States and other democratic powers. But here "system of
states" is a key phrase, and it refers, of
course, to a famous dictum of Lenin.
He warned that while the Soviet Union
existed in a complex "system of states"
of which only one was socialist, capitalist encirclement and bloody battles
were inevitable. Thus Molotov holds
out the olive branch to the capitalist
states and simultaneously keeps himself on record as an orthodox Leninist.
Though our diplomats and State
Department officers assigned to Russian matters should normally gather in
such recondite meanings and evaluate
them, it is probably too much to expect
"everybody who can read and write"
to detect them. But there is considerably less excuse for our mass ignorance
about elementary facts concerning Russia, if public opinion is to play an intelligent role in determining policy toward our gravest problem in foreign
affairs.
According to a survey made by
Princeton University, two out of three
Americans don't know that Russians
can privately own homes, furniture,
care, and so on and that farmers 
till individual plots. The same inquiry disclosed that about 64 per
cent of adult Americans don't know
that wages are not equal in Russia, but differential; 83 per cent don't
know that most Russians are not members of the Communist Party. Seven
out of nine Americans don't know that
Russia produced most of the war materials used by the Red Army, and only
one out of two knows that the avowed
aim of the Soviet government is to
build Russia into a socialist state.
Thirty-eight million Americans of voting age "don't know at all what kind
of government Russia has.¡±
Much can be blamed on Moscow's
own censorship and absurd secrecy, and
on an incredibly blockheaded treatment of American correspondents-
perhaps the one truly incomprehensible
fact about Russia. But that is no justification for our mental darkness about
the only country Americans profess to
fear today. These elementary things
could be learned in ten minutes spent
in any library.
The Princeton poll did not ask the
question, "Is the Soviet system called
communism or socialism?" but probably not one American in ten could explain the difference. If you look into
Webster's Collegiate Dictionary you
will see "socialist" defined as a synonym of "collectivist, nihilist, communist, anarchist., Bolshevik," all listed
together on the naive premise that
"these groups are agreed in distrusting
capitalist control of industry.¡±
Yet lexicographers can hardly be
blamed for our own political illiteracy.
They are supposed to inscribe meanings
in common American usage, and there is
no doubt the above definition reflects it.
It is not required that we "accept
Marxism" in order to study its terms,
any more than you need believe your
distant ancestor was a gorilla in order
to study Darwin's theory and understand it. But some people are smugly
satisfied to dismiss both Marx and
Darwin as "foreign propagandists."
Unfortunately, they predominate in
the lunatic fringe that raves about preventive war and bringing Russia to reason by dropping A bombs on Moscow.
Some may say, "Let them understand us. Why should we try to understand them?" It is a poor answer
from
anyone who wants to fight Russia.
He should hope the contrary-that the
Russians are more ignorant of our
problems than we are of theirs. Woe to
him who goes to war without knowing
his enemy, as Hitler learned, and definitely it is not possible to know Russia
while believing that "nihilist" is a 
synonym for socialist."
It so happens that Marxism and
Soviet ideology are not passing notions,
as many thought before Hitler's defeat, but living forces which grip the
minds of millions of men and women
with whom we share the world. "Marxian
"is a language we must learn, 
sooner or later, if only to define our
differences with Russia and leftist
Europe and Asia in terms of agreements we uphold in common.
No doubt the task of understanding
is enormously complicated by the fact
that Moscow speaks with two voices.
One is the language of Soviet nationalism, slowly integrating itself within the
deep forces of Russian history. The
other is still the language of social
revolution. Every Soviet leader is in a
sense a dual personality: first a practical politician concerned with immediate problems of security and 
power; second, a Marxist, a socialist,
an adherent of theoretical doctrines.
This dualism was long personified by
the Soviet government's efforts to
maintain collaboration with capitalist
states and at the same time to give
haven to a Comintern pledged to overthrow them. And because Marxism-
Leninism remains the guiding philosophy behind Soviet domestic policy,
outside politicians and observers-including American communists-continue to confuse the vital interests of
Russia as a state and going concern
with what are often purely theoretical
abstractions or propaganda aims.
Soviet representatives at home and
abroad more often speak as pure nationalists than as Marxists, but always
as something of both. Now they may
adopt a position solely for tactical
reasons, again for long-range strategic
ends; sometimes a speech is worded in
Marxist stereotypes purely to satisfy
the record, sometimes in earnest and
as a guide to incipient action; in some
situations they are bluffing in the ancient ways of power politics, to make
the best of a bad bargain; in others,
vital national interests and theoretical
aims are identical.
Few foreign communists understand
this interplay of nationalist and socialist forces in Soviet policy. With their
overemphasis on the doctrines of socialist power, and their lack of experience in the functions and responsibilities of national power, American
communists frequently get themselves
badly mangled between the main gears
and the auxiliary wheels of Soviet
diplomacy. Thus it happens repeatedly
that they lead their followers into
political cul-de-sacs because of their
overzealous haste to march in behind
what they mistake for the main Soviet
column, only to find themselves isoIated, and forced to beat a hasty retreat, when events reveal that they
were supporting a mere feint or parry,
while principal aims of Soviet strategy
lay elsewhere. Russians are often as
amazed at such behavior as we are.
All Soviet pronouncements really
should be read with bifocal lenses. It
is necessary to know Russia as a
functioning nation, its real physical
possibilities and limitations, as well as
the fount of Marxist dogma, and what
is discarded theory and what is living
practice. A little study, and Russia is
no riddle. It is easier to understand
than America is for Russians, because
there is a Rosetta stone to Soviet
politics. Without it, one may end up
with Hitler.
Unfortunately, instead of seeking
out the services of men with a sense of
history who have made an objective
effort to understand Russia in relation
to the world political complex, and
both languages used by Moscow, we
now tend to rely upon sentinels whose
training has best equipped them to live
in a state of maximum political obfuscation. Everyone knows that since
Roosevelt's death our foreign policy
has more and more been determined by
generals and admirals on the basis of
what they see as "strategic necessities"
in a hypothetical war with Russia.
This might not be bad if these gentlemen had somehow acquired a political
education since leaving West Point,
but such is not always the case.
During the war, our ignorance of
Soviet vocabulary led to countless misunderstandings, and it still does today.
Take Gen. Patrick Hurley's celebrated
interview with Stalin in the spring of
1945. Hurley bad come to the conclusion-against the opinion of experienced foreign-service officers-that
the Chinese communists could not
stand without Russian aid; in short,
Stalin was running them. Accordingly,
he went to the Kremlin, and in the
course of exchanging pleasantries he
asked Stalin what he would "settle
for" in China. Stalin replied in time-worn phrases that "the Soviet government was determined not to interfere
in the internal affairs of China," but
said that he would like to see the communists enter a coalition government
with the nationalists under Chiang
Kai-ahek, whom he recognized to be
bead of the legal Chinese government.
Hurley apparently interpreted Stalin's remarks as an undertaking 
that Moscow would repudiate the communists if they did not come to terms
with the Kuomintang, and he wired
the White House that he and Uncle
Joe were in complete agreement. Back
in Chungking, he continued to assure
Truman that he had the Chinese communists in his pocket-till political
explosions after V-J Day demonstrated
they were anywhere else but.
Woolly thinking also prevailed during
the writing of armistice agreements
with Rumania, Bulgaria and other satellite states. The Rumanian armistice
obligated any post-defeat government
to abolish all pro-Hitler organizations,
"as well as other organizations conducting propaganda hostile to the
United Nations, in particular to the
Soviet Union," and to prohibit. "the existence¡±
of such activities for all
time. Control of all forms of public
expression was placed under "the
Allied (Soviet.) High Command" and
the government undertook to "carry
out all its instructions and orders."
Yet at no time was the phrase "Allied
(Soviet) High Command" defined,
nor was Anglo-American responsibility.
Lacking such definition, the clear implication was unlimited power of decision to the Red Army.
Much the same terms appeared in
armistices for Bulgaria and Hungary.
In addition, all shipping belonging to
Bulgaria was to be turned over to Russia, as well as control of industry and
transport. All war material, defined as
"equipment belonging to, used by, or
intended for use by, enemy military
or para-military formations or members thereof " was devised to the Red
Army in each case. Considering the
nature of the carte blanche we thus
sanctioned-which the Yalta declaration did not revoke-it is perhaps surprising that any opposition to Communist Party rule in Balkan countries
was permitted at all.
Of course, the Russians knew perfectly well, in that case, that the Allied
powers had no intention of underwriting communism in the Balkans. But in
fairness we must ask ourselves why,
from the Soviet viewpoint, things
should always be rend in our way. Russian and English are official languages
on a parity, but behind them both lie
philosophies also implicitly accepted on
a plane of equality. People living on
their part of the earth have been
taught to think and act inside a pattern
of their own for more than a quarter
of a contury now, and they take it almost as much for granted as we do
ours. When the Russians made agreements covering enemy countries, they
did so because the terms seemed work
able within a projection of meanings
familiar to them. Our generals and
politicians never assumed that any Allied agreement required us to support
communist parties in our occupied
areas. Why should the Russians have
08sumed the same agreements required
them to support capitalist parties in
theirs?
Yet much hysteria about Russia
originates in such assumptions. Of
course, it is silly to look for objectivity
in matters of serious political struggle,
and it is no more to be expected in certain sections of our press than it is in
Red Star or Izvestia. But while it may
be all right to fool the other fellows,
there is some danger that we may
be deceived by our own propaganda,
No doubt the Russians have tried to
prevent us from looking behind their
iron curtain, but there is also evidence
that a smoke screen of our own making
sometimes keeps us from looking out.
It was not the iron curtain, for example, that prevented the American
people from understanding the significance of Stalin's speech in February,
1946, or his interview with Alexander
Werth. Both were widely misinterpreted in the American press, as well as
misread by generals and diplomats.
Here it was chiefly noted that Stalin
said the war had arisen as "the inevitable result" of the development of rivalries "on the basis of monopoly capitalism¡± 
and implied that it had been impossible to avoid war in a capitalist
world. He called for "a new, might
upsurge in national economy
USSR, stressing heavy industry especially. It was noted that Stalin
barely mentioned Allied contributions
to victory and made no promises for
the newborn UN. On these grounds
the majority of commentators concluded that the document was bellicose,
menacing, uncompromising, showed
Russian insincerity, and revealed deep
plotting to Bolshevize us in another
war.
That was perhaps an expected reaction from permanently conditioned
Russophobes, of whom we have as
many as the Russians have xenophobes.
But even sober and normally cautious
prophets drew strange conclusions. For
a sampler, here is Walter Lippmann:
"Stalin has made the decision to make
military power his first objective," he
sonorously intoned, "and we are forced
to make a corresponding decision.¡±
Solemnly he warned his very influential
following that, "Since Russia is going
to organize 'a new mighty upsurge' of
power for military ends, we must
make haste with the atomizers.
With all due respect-which is considerable-to Mr. Lippmann, there is
no word for such logic but "asinine."
Stalin had actually said nothing whatever about industrializing to assert military power or conquest, but had
streesed the heavy war damage inflicted on Russia and the need for reconstruction. Demaree Bess has reported in
these columns talking to a diplomat
just back from Moscow, who excitedly
told him Russia was feverishly preparing for war. Asked to explain, the diplo-
mat had no testimony to offer except
Soviet emphasis on increased steel production. To Bess, as to anyone else who
has studied Soviet planning over the
past two decades, this thinker was just
funny.
So it in worth cursorily re-examining
Stalin's speech, because it still dramatically illustrates why we often misunderstand Russia. Remember that it
was the first comprehensive postwar
review by the head of the state. It
was an election speech, addressed to
Russian voters, not to our Congress.
Though everyone knew the result in
advance, still the party was up for
judgment by the people, and the purpose wan to paint the beat possible picture of its achievements. Tributes to
Lend-Lease would have been as much
out of place aa hosannas to the Red
Army in Gov. Dewey's campaign. Finally, such an important pronouncement was not just the personal expression of an individual, but a synthesis
of views within the Central Committee
that rules Russia, representing a reconciliation of practical and theoretical
differences bound to exist. Probably
every word was thoroughly discussed
in the Politburo before it was approved.
Now, everybody who has followed
Soviet politics knows that the evolution of the war and its outcome presented Marxist theorists with thorny
new questions which have never been
answered in a finished thesis. In a
later article I hope to explore some of
these questions in detail, but here it
must suffice to point to the outstanding fact that the "imperialist states"
did not perform as prophesied. The
"world bourgeoisie" consciously rejected their one great opportunity to
unite and destroy the one socialist state.
Instead, the socialist fatherland was
saved from destruction by an alliance
that endured with the most advanced
capitalist powers of the earth.
Until this conflict, Marxist speculation had always assumed that in the
event of an "imperialist war"-struggle for redivision of the earth-against
the Soviet Union, proletarian uprisings
would occur in major capitalist countries and Russia would be saved by
a combination of her own fighting
strength plus insurrections in the rear
of the enemy. This idea is organic with
Leninism and traces also to a basic
Marxist theory of "the breakdown of
capitalism" when, conditions becoming intolerable for the working class, it
rises and takes power.
Not only were there no proletarian
revolts of the classical pattern in Germany or Japan but the Socialist Union
was saved by a combination of its own
fighting strength plus the stability of
its "imperialist " Allies-which also
raised the novel question of bolsheviks
dying to preserve capitalist states.
During the war I asked Gen. A. A.
Scherbakov, then head of the Red
Army political department, and a member of the Politburo, whether the fact
that the greatest capitalist power had
come to the aid of socialist Russia did
not introduce an entirely new stage in
world history, one quite unforeseen by
Lenin's classic The Imperialist War.
He readily agreed that it did; things
had happened which Lenin could not
anticipate.
Did this new situation demand a
formal revision in one set of doctrines?
Should it be quietly laid to rest, along
with Marx's prophecy of "the withering away of the state" under socialism?
Was the corollary a new orientation of
Soviet policy based on an assumption
of peaceful coexistence of the "two
systems" for a long time? Widespread
debate and discussion ensued, but
Stalin's speech was the nearest thing to
a formal conclusion to emerge from 
party controversy.
Stalin handled the whole question by
implication, and his answer was a compromise. Paying homage to dogma by 
attributing the origins of the war to irreconcilable contradictions within the
capitalist system, he also acknowledged an entirely new development. 
¡°The second world war,¡± he said, ¡°differed fundamentally from the first in character.¡± Abandoning
altogether Moscow¡¯s earlier thesis that before
1941 the conflict was an ¡°imperialist war,¡± Stalin said that ¡°unlike the first World War, from the very outset 
it assumed the character of an anti-Fascist war, a war of liberation, one of whose
aims was the restoration of democratic liberties.¡± 
From a theoretical standpoint, this
admission was vastly significant. If it 
was possible for capitalist nations to fight an anti-Fascist war, a war for democratic liberties, 
before Soviet participation as well as afterward, them
peaceful collaboration for the same 
ends is clearly possible. It is from this thesis that Molotov¡¯s November 
statement before the UN undoubtedly derived its authority. 
¡°The war vividly demonstrated that states with widely different political 
structures [that is, imperialist and socialist] had extremely important interests 
in common. Mutual aid between them produced great results. The recognition [by the Soviet Union] of the
principles of such international co-operation has a profound meaning. 
It reflects the firm will to achieve universal peace and readiness to enter into
peaceful competition¡¦ between states and social systems.¡± 
Another overlooked point in Stalin¡¯s 
speech was from a practical viewpoint
more important than the first. The 
Soviet Union hopes, he said, eventually 
to produce 60,000,000 tons of steel annually. Only then, he added, could the
homeland be considered ""guaranteed
against all possible eventualities"--
that is, wars. But "that will take three
five-year plans, if not more." In other
words, by the hardest kind of toil,
Russia aspires to make, in 1961, two
thirds as much steel as the present
capacity of the United States. Stalin
would be eighty-two by then. But he
probably does not expect to live long
enough to see Russia guaranteed against
all "eventualities"-and hence not
long enough to be able to launch an
aggressive war against the United
States, even if he so desired.
Official pronouncements from the
Kremlin, Alexander Werth's interview,
and most recent Soviet proposals for
disarmament further confirmed such
interpretations, as I shall attempt to
show later on. In this context I first
wish to urge that we learn to read the
Soviet languages before we draw conclusions of despair. It isn't a question
of doing it to please the Russians, but
to keep our own blood pressure down.
Molotov's bluntness, Vyshinsky's sarcasms, Gromyko's dour lack of humor,
can all be a source of enlightenment, if
we know what they really mean.
Personally, I fully agreed with Admiral Nimitz when he said he "wasn't
the slightest bit distressed over all 
the harsh words being thrown around
in the conferences. "It took the colonies
thirteen years to agree on a constitution, and they all spoke the same language,¡± he wisely 
observed. If we keep at it we may eventually get at
least thirteen definitions in common.
Armed with this dictionary we could
get together to agree on plans for some
solid two-way streets.


THE END










