FALSE GOD DIES,
CRISIS IS BORN

AN AUTHORITY FORESEES LONG FIGHT
FOR POWER AND SEMI-DIVINE STATUS

The death of Josef Stalin last week was like a thunderclap
without lightning-the roar filled the world hut there was
scant illumination. Realizing that little could be learned
from the censored Moscow dispatches, LIFE consulted
Edward Crankshaw, one of the world's recognized authorities on Soviet politics and author of Russia and the
Russians and Cracks in the Kremlin Wall. His eloquent
and penetrating account, cabled from London, follows.

by EDWARD CRANKSHAW


In America when a president lies dying, in England when a king lies dying,
all bitterness of strife is muted. People move about their business in a
dream; and in their thoughts is the image of the death chamber, in their
hearts the shared sorrow of those who watch for death. These, for a day,
put off the pomp of high estate and appear in their natural human dignity, upheld by the silent sympathy of millions.
In Russia when an autocrat lies dying the atmosphere is dark with
uncertainty and the unbridled conflict of ambition. In the hearts of the
common people the habitual pain of the evil they know is overborne by
the unspoken fear of the evil they do not know. In the words of the new
Soviet government's own communiqu?, there is "disarray and panic.
Stalin lay dying in the palace of the czars, prostrate and unconscious
the real and also the symbolic center of a fantastic web of plots and
counterplots reaching out from the anterooms of the Kremlin to the
remotest corners of his empire. Men with great interests at stake came
as close as they dared, as close as they might, to the heart of tremendous
events. All were scheming, some for the good of Russia, more for their
own secret ends, a handful for absolute power.
This was in the Russian tradition of the harsh and arbitrary despotism
which fears the light of day. All European nations look back on a history
full of disgraceful episodes. Russia alone relives her ancient history in
the era of Coca-Cola and the Hydramatic drive.
Inside the lowering Kremlin walls the first of Stalin's true forebears,
Ivan the Terrible, killed with his own hands his son and heir and then
went mad with remorse. From the Kremlin in 1591 Boris Godunov ordered the assassination of the child who stood between him and the
throne. Later the tradition moved to St. Petersburg. The infant Czar
Ivan VI was imprisoned by Elizabeth, the usurper empress, in the underwater dungeons of the Schl?sselberg until he became an idiot and was
murdered by his guards. Catherine, the wife of Peter the Third, had her
own husband murdered in order to assume the crown. These acts occurred
not in the Middle Ages but at the time of Voltaire. In the second year of
the 19th Century the Czar Paul was murdered in his own palace.
Stalin was the inheritor of this tradition. It is not to be wondered at
that Trotsky was sure that Stalin had poisoned Lenin. And Stalin himself
has used the poisoning motif: in the 1930s to account for the deaths of
his outspoken friend Ordzhonikidze and of the great writer, Gorky; only
the other day to account for the deaths of two members of the Politburo,
Shcherbakov and Zhdanov.
The legend of the poisoning doctors is not new. It is old. Ivan the
Terrible required his doctors, foreigners imported from the West, to
poison those whom he distrusted. Nobody today would remember that as
a living story had not Stalin himself revived it in his own lifetime. And
so it is hardly surprising that as soon as the nine doctors were accused of
a living story had not Stalin himself revived it in his own lifetime. And
so it is hardly surprising that as soon as the nine doctors were accused of
plot against Stalin-to remove his own trusted doctors and substitute
poisoning Zhdanov the story went round that in fact this was part of a
others in the service of a pretender. It meant, people said, that Stalin
We do not have to believe this story. It may or may not be true. The
would soon die. Now he is dead.
We do not have to believe this story. It may or may not be true. The 
point is that it is in keeping with Kremlin atmosphere and Stalin had
only himself to blame if it is believed. It is against this dark background of
violence, suspicion, conspiracy and fear that we must see the men who
have spent their lives in Stalin's shadow, and now survive him.
Who are these vaguely looming figures? We know a little about the
men who have figured in public as Stalin's closest colleagues. We have
had in past years queer glimpses into their quarrels. But there are others
of whom we know nothing at all, and the key to the future, the future inheritor of Stalin's mantle, may well prove to be someone of whom the Russians, to say nothing of the Western world, have scarcely heard.
So that even though the official succession is now proclaimed on conventional lines (Malenkov to be chairman of the council of ministers, or
prime minister; Beria to be his first deputy; Molotov superseded by these
younger men) this tells us very little. Sooner or later, if the regime is to
persist, there will have to be a new leader, quasi-divine, different in kind
and obeyed by all the others, the new "Little Father" for all to adore.
A pale-faced politician in a badly cut lounge suit who has been kept in
the shade by a god all his lifetime cannot assume the attributes of a deity
overnight. The people have to be educated to see a god where there was
only a professional party boss. This is true in Russia itself, and it is doubly true beyond Soviet borders?
in China and in the European satellites-where Stalin has appeared both as remote and as omnipresent as God.
Stalin some months ago caused the reorganization of the Politburo, a
ramshackle apparatus, to make a machine which could run easily after
his death with a calculated dispersal of power. That machine was thrown
down and totally destroyed, without a word of explanation, within 24
hours of Stalin's death. The new regime has started with a scarcely veiled
coup d'?tat, undoing Stalin's work. The men who have carried out this
revolution, Malenkov and Beria, now work together. But the very violence
of their first joint action has set the tone for the times to come. They have
acted quickly and suddenly to forestall possible trouble and to concentrate all
power in their hands. To ensure their safety they have gone out
of their way to placate the army by recalling the great hero, Marshal
Zhukov, from his exile and making him a deputy minister of defense.
Viacheslav Molotov, officially Stalin's first deputy but lately sunk into
the background, has been relegated to third place. A far more formidable
figure than is generally supposed, the man whose brain was good enough
to make him Stalin's chief of staff for 30 years, he has had to make way
for younger and more ruthless men.
The first of these is Georgi Malenkov, 12 years Molotov's junior,
tough, able, unremittingly ambitious, a man of action and a man of intrigue modeled on his master's plan. Once Stalin's private secretary and
for long the supreme party boss, Malenkov-like Stalin before him-
has worked successfully to model the party in his own image. He is by
all appearances the strongest personality in the Soviet Union and as
such Stalin's natural heir.
The second is Lavrenti Pavlovich Beria, the chief policeman, about
Malenkov's age, who has spent his life in the police as Malenkov spent
his in the party, a confidant and fellow countryman of Stalin's. Gentle in
manner, with pince-nez, Beria inspires people who meet him to say that
he reminds them of a schoolmaster. They said the same of Himmler, and
for the same reasons.
These three have lately stood closest to Stalin. During the past two
years there have been vivid and unmistakable signs of a conflict between
them. The fact that they work together now does not necessarily mean
that they will not fight in the future.

The vanquished and the victors

Five years ago one would have had to list with them Zhdanov and
Andreyev, but one is dead, the other thrown away. Five years ago one
would have had to put next on the list Kaganovich and Mikoyan; Kaganovich, the brilliant and energetic Jew, Stalin's brother-in-law, who has
so many times saved the country from ruin by desperate action when
this or that aspect of the plan has broken down; Mikoyan, the Armenian
with the intelligence and approach of an American tycoon. But Jews and
Armenians have no chance now of being deified by Russians, who want
one of themselves. And two other men, Bulganin and Khrushchev, have
long since outpaced Kaganovich and Mikoyan.
Bulganin is the darkest horse among the visible runners. Cultivated,
highly educated and intelligent, a banker and administrator by career, a
political boss by opportunity, he draws on reserves of power which we
can only suspect. Onetime minister of defense, he is still the army's
spokesman in the Kremlin. Whether he is working for the army or
against it. we do not know, Whether he favors the political generals,
Sokolovsky and Shtemenko, or whether he has maintained a close liaison with the exiled generals like Marshal Zhukov, we do not know. Who
his friends may be in the Politburo we do not know. He was picked by
Stalin for his ability; he may follow a solitary star.
Khrushchev is less picturesque. We know little of him save that he
was the scourge of the Ukraine when the Ukraine worked itself into a
state of rebellion after the war. And he has been given the job of regi-
menting the peasants, of regimenting the most independent-minded half
of the population. But he is not in the same class as Bulganin.
Finally there is Voroshilov, Stalin's drinking companion and contemporary, who has survived by the grace of Stalin and means nothing without the grace of Stalin. Too old and respeeted to sack, he has been kicked
upstairs to become the new titular head of state, the so-called president
of the U.S.S.R.
What are these men doing? How strong are they? Who now gives
orders to the soldiers? Who gives orders to the great industrial magnates? Who gives orders to anybody at all? The answer to the last question is the Central Committee of the Communist Party. That, until this
week, meant Stalin, the boss, Khozyain. Stalin spoke and the central
Committee fathered his words. Today Malenkov stands to the party as
Stalin stood. The voice of the party should be the voice of Malenkov.
But will people obey the voice of a man when they are used to obeying a
god? Will they obey anything at all but force? And who has the force?
The army has force, and the police have force. But the force of the
my is dispersed and diffused. Who runs the army? Bulganin of the
Kremlin? Vasilevsky, the minister of defense? Sokolovsky, the new chief
of staff? All these together? We do not know. But we do know who runs
the police and so does everybody else: Beria. And the force of the police
is compactly organized, immediate in striking power, ubiquitous.
If Beria wishes to be the new god he can bide his time and carry out
his will with the help of the police. If Beria wishes to break the power
of the party, he has only to contrive an alliance with the army to sweep
everything before him. Only death can break his power. On the other
hand we do not know whether Beria aspires to open deification-like
Stalin, he is a Georgian and the other Russians might be slow to accord
godhood to two Georgians in a row. If he does not, if he is content to
work under Malenkov, between them these two will conquer, and Malenkov will himself be god. It seems clear that Stalin saw Malenkov as his
ultimate successor and built him up, but not far enough to challenge
his authority. Beria was his counterpoise. Stalin may have died too soon
for Malenkov.
The government machine exists. When Lenin died there was nothing
like it. On the face of it, it is an admirable, robust and infinitely comprehensive machine. Malenkov controls the party, Beria the police, Bulganin the army, Kaganovich drives the workers, Khrushchev the peasants,
Mikoyan the machinery of trade and exchange. Molotov, reduced in
stature, embodies the link with Lenin. The machine may run for many
years with these ambitious men maneuvering for position, while still
more ambitious newcomers scheme to penetrate and gain control, But it
cannot last. Government by committee can only be an interim affair. The
"Little Father" is necessary to the Russians and will remain necessary
until and unless they achieve a democratic government. Stalin knew this
and made himself a god, The men he has left behind know it too. The
very survival of Soviet Communism demands that one of them must
some day become a god.

THE MAN MALENKOV FOLLOWS

In the cops-and-robber days when he was ducking the czar's police it was
handy to have a tough-sounding alias like Stalin, which means "Steel."
The boy who grew up to this alias was born Josef Vissarionovich Djugashvili in the village of Gori, in Georgia, in 1879. Because she had lost
three children his mother had high ambitions for her fourth and sought
to elevate his rank by training him for priesthood. But her "Soso" ("Little
Joe"), after five years in a seminary, was
ejected for reading liberal books and became
a full-time professional revolutionary. At
21 he tasted blood in the riots in Tiflis. At
22 he was professionally instigating strikes
in the Batum factories. In the name of the
party he planned riots, wrote for clandestine party papers including Pravda and engineered bloody robberies of imperial couriers. He became inured to perpetual arrest,
exile to Siberia and stubbornly managed repeated prison escapes. In 1905 he had met
Lenin, leader of the Bolsheviks, and became
a fanatical Lenin supporter. In 1917 when
the Germans, at war with Russia, smuggled
Lenin back to Petrograd where he demanded the overthrow of the provisional revolutionary government, Stalin became one of Lenin's executive strong-arm
men. He dealt with the touchy questions so vigorously that he caused
Lenin to remark, "We have here a wonderful Georgian," and he proved
a ruthless and able military strategist against the anti-Bolshevik armies,
In 1922 he was made party General Secretary, then a purely administrative job-at the time Stalin did not rank with leaders like Trotsky and
Kamenev. But by building a party machine he transformed his secretaryship into a major office and, when Lenin died, he clinched his new position by personally arranging the funeral and making the eulogy himself.


THE GRAND MASTER OF THE DOUBLECROSS

A talent for the monstrous doublecross, and the stomach for it, carried
Stalin to power and sustained his regime. Lenin was scarcely embalmed
before the Georgian unhorsed Trotsky by having the Communist party
repudiate the harsh policies his rival favored. Then, in an about-face, he
out-Trotskied Trotsky by callously purging dissenters. At the same time
he was changing the face of Russia by collectivizing farms, while three
million peasants starved, and changing over to an industrial economy.
At home the last vestiges of opposition were eliminated by liquidating
legions of suspect Red leaders, including 20,000 army officers, in the
framed trials of the late 1930s. After rallying international Reds
in a popular front to fight "fascist totalitarianism," Stalin cynically
undercut them by joining Hitler in the pact that made World War II
possible. Betrayed in turn by the German, Stalin turned to the Allies,
making promises at Tehran, Yalta and Potsdam which his regime honored mostly by violating them. Aging gracefully through it all, the master intriguer grew into an appearance of statesmanlike benevolence
which, at last, a disillusioned world learned to evaluate in his own words,
"Sincere diplomacy is no more possible than dry water or wooden iron."
