Building a People's Foreign Policy
THIS GENERATION of Americans has learned that the United States
is a principal trustee of the world’s peace and freedom. What the United
States says and does affects the lives of people in the most remote areas of
this earth. The words and deeds of a member of the Cabinet or of the Congress
often reaches into more homes than those of many Kings and Presidents.
Even Generalissimo Stalin, in his last talks with Harry Hopkins,
acknowledged the world-wide interests and responsibilities of the United
States and declared that our country has more reason to be a world power
than any other.
Leadership and its inherent responsibilities we have accepted with reluctance?
reluctance that two costly wars have not wholly overcome. But
without our initiative, the United Nations probably would not have been
created to promote and maintain international peace and security. Without
our determined effort, it is doubtful whether ravages of war can be
removed quickly enough to give the United Nations a chance to work.
The responsibilities that clearly are ours will be discharged in the years
ahead only if we develop in international affairs a policy that truly reflects
the will of our people. I am convinced that to build a people’s foreign policy
we must pursue three primary objectives.
First, we must have a foreign policy that is bipartisan in its origin and
development; that is national rather than political in its conduct and its
character; and that, consequently, is a continuing policy worthy of the
confidence of other nations.
Second, we must have an institution that is responsive to the will of the
people and able to translate our policies into effective action.
And, third, we must leave behind the era of secret diplomacy. We must
make sure that our people have an opportunity to know the problems
their diplomats confront so that they can judge properly the proposed
solution. The right of the people to know is a basic element in the development
of a people’s foreign policy.
These objectives, I know from experience, are not easy to attain. But
the story of what I encountered in my pursuit of them may be of some
service in the work that lies ahead.
My conviction on the first objective stems from World War I. In
November 1918, I was in Paris with Representatives Carter Glass and
Richard S. Whaley of South Carolina. Out of all our talks with military
and diplomatic representatives, I was particularly impressed by the comments
of General Tasker H. Bliss, our military representative on the
Supreme Council at Versailles. Among other things, he told us that, with
the approach of peace, his associates lost much of their idealism; they
talked less about ending all wars and more about reparations and territorial
gains. He thought there was little chance of establishing international
machinery to preserve peace unless President Wilson came to France
and could make a successful appeal over the heads of politicians.
When I returned to Washington, I spoke to President Wilson about my
conversation with General Bliss. He told me that in the latter days of the
war he relied on Bliss more than on any other representative in Europe.
However, he could not do as General Bliss suggested, he said, because he
could not speak French and any appeal he might make would lose its
force when translated into another language. When I visited him again a
short time later, he then told me he had decided to go to Europe. To this
day, I remember his words:
“I am going,” he said, “in the hope that I may redeem the pledge I
made to the mothers of the world that we were fighting a war to end wars.”
He was not making a speech to me. He stated it simply as the reason for
his decision.
In the early days of World War II, I told this story to President Roosevelt
and expressed the opinion that Wilson lost his great fight for the
League of Nations because he did not take with him at least one Republican
Senator. President Roosevelt shared my opinion.
At Yalta, immediately after the Big Three agreed to support the Dumbarton
Oaks proposal and before he left the conference table, President
Roosevelt instructed Secretary Stettinius to name, as members of the delegation
to the San Francisco Conference, Senator Connally and Senator
Vandenberg. They worked in harmony with Secretary Stettinius at San
Francisco and their wholehearted co-operation was largely responsible for
the almost unanimous vote by which our adherence to the United Nations
was approved by the Senate.
Before the first meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers, I decided
to invite a prominent Republican, well informed on international affairs,
to accompany me. It did not occur to me then that a Senator could be away
for as long a time as the treaty-drafting business was likely to consume.
I consulted Senator Vandenberg. He suggested that I invite Mr. John
Foster Dulles, who for years has been keenly interested in our foreign relations
and is exceptionally well qualified. Mr. Dulles accepted the invitation,
notwithstanding his business commitments, and was of great assistance. Later I recommended to President Truman that Mr. Dulles be a
member of our delegation to the first meeting of the General Assembly
of the United Nations. He accomplished much and continued his service
at the meeting of the General Assembly in New York.
Our participation in the United Nations constantly and deliberately
has been bipartisan. At both sessions of the General Assembly, our delegation
included, in addition to Mr. Dulles, the top-ranking Democratic and
Republican members of the Foreign Affairs Committees of both the Senate
and the House, Senators Connally and Vandenberg and Representatives
Bloom and Eaton. At the first session at London one of the delegates
was my friend John G. Townsend, former Senator from Delaware, chairman
of the Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee, and a man respected
by all Senators.
When Edward R. Stettinius resigned as head of the permanent delegation
to the United Nations, I recommended to the President that he
appoint the Vermont Republican, Senator Warren R. Austin, as chief of
our permanent mission to the United Nations. The President was delighted
with the suggestion. He liked Austin, having been closely associated
with him in the Senate. Throughout his Senate career Austin had
shown an extensive knowledge of and a keen interest in foreign relations.
He had made a great contribution to the success of the Chapultepec Conference
and, in fact, since 1939, has co-operated wholeheartedly in the
prosecution of the war and the preparations for the peace.
After we agreed at Moscow to resume work on the preparation of peace
treaties at Paris, I asked Senators Connally and Vandenberg to go with
me as advisers. They generously agreed and served through the meetings
of the council and also during the peace conference. I discussed with them
every phase of our foreign relations. In 1946 they spent 213 days away
from Washington attending international conferences. No two legislators
ever served their country more loyally or more efficiently than they
did at those meetings.
Because Senator Vandenberg represented the political party opposed
to the administration, and because he enjoyed the confidence of the overwhelming
majority of his party, his support enabled us to speak of our
foreign policy as the American policy.
At the conference of the Council of Foreign Ministers each delegation
has five seats at the table. Seated with me were the two Senators, the
deputy in charge of the work on the treaty under discussion, and the interpreter.
Each Foreign Minister can bring to the conference room an
additional eight or ten members of his staff. It makes quite an audience.
Consequently the Ministers frequently hold private meetings in the hope
that the absence of an audience may promote agreement. When these meetings
are held each Foreign Minister is allowed to bring two associates in
addition to the interpreter. To all such meetings, I asked the two Senators
to accompany me. I preferred to have their counsel rather than the aid of
the technicians of the State Department, as helpful as these gentlemen always
were. Also, I wanted the Senators to know at first hand every stage
of the treaty making.
The political party in power cannot ask the opposition party to share
responsibility for the conduct of our foreign relations unless the leaders
of the opposition are fully advised of our policies. This is true when the
Congress and President are of the same party. It is particularly true when
a majority of the Congress and the Chief Executive are not of the same
political party. The executive branch of the government cannot announce
a policy of importance requiring congressional action and then inform the
leaders of the opposition. Even if the opposition leaders think the proposal
unwise they must support it or abroad the impression of dissension.
A policy of by-passing the Congress would make impossible a
bipartisan policy.
While Senator Vandenberg and Senator Connally were with me I
sought their counsel not only on the treaties but on other matters connected
with our foreign relations that were submitted to me by the Department
each day. They were helpful and, though I know they were
frequently and skillfully tempted, not once did either of them give to newspaper
friends advance information of our plans.
The participation of Senators Connally and Vandenberg in the meetings
of the Council of Foreign Ministers, the peace conference and the
United Nations served to let the people of the world know that the foreign
policy of the United States was a continuing policy and would not
end with the defeat of a political party. It enabled me, during the ceremony at the Washington airport which marked our departure for the
Peace Conference, to address this statement to the people of the world:
“The situation is entirely different from that which existed after World
War I. Then we were badly divided. This time there is no division between
the Executive and the Congress as to the making of peace. This
time there is no division between the great political parties as to the making
of peace. ... We are all working together not as partisans of any
political party or of any branch of the Government; we are working together
as Americans. ... We are deeply conscious that if we as a nation
are to exert our influence on the affairs of the world, we must be united.”
But during our stay in Paris, I was to experience one more demonstration
that bipartisanship does not necessarily insure unity. Long before the
Paris meeting, I had learned that the most conscientious effort to make a
just peace would not receive united support at home. I have already reported
the criticism I encountered when, at London, the Council of Foreign
Ministers could not agree. I was prepared for that. But I was not
prepared for some of the criticism I received when, at Moscow, we did
agree.
The story of the Moscow meeting, I have told; the long negotiations,
the final session which ended at 3 130 A. M., our take-off for the United
States four hours later at 7130 a. m., December 27. My statement that we
were thoroughly exhausted when we landed at Washington at noon on
the twenty-ninth will be fully understood. Nevertheless, I went directly to
the State Department and to work.
Upon asking when I could see the President, an employee at the White
House told me that the President was cruising down the Potomac and expected
to remain on his boat for several days. I requested that a message
be sent to him saying that I had returned and would like to report to him
at his convenience and that I expected to make a radio speech the following
evening about the work of the conference.
Shortly thereafter, I received an invitation to visit the President that
afternoon on his boat, which was anchored near Quantico. I took a plane
and reached Quantico about 4:3O.
After I had reported to the President on what had happened at the conference,
he expressed wholehearted approval of my action. He asked me
to remain for dinner. There were present, as I recall, members of the
President’s staff who frequently accompanied him on such trips: Admiral
Leahy, George Allen, General Vaughan, Clark Clifford, Charles Ross,
Matthew Connelly, General Graham, and Judge Rosenman, who was
working on a speech the President was to deliver the following week.
While we were at dinner, the President asked me to repeat what I had
said to him about the conference, and I did so. From time to time the President
interrupted to express his approval. There was no expression of disapproval
or approval by any other except Admiral Leahy, who said that
my report made him feel much better about the situation but that he did
not approve of the agreement on Rumania and Bulgaria. I reminded him
that both of us had been at Yalta and at Potsdam when President Roosevelt
and President Truman had entered into agreements on the same subjects,
seeking to establish provisional governments that would include
representation of all political parties and that would provide for free elections
and the four freedoms. These agreements, I added, had not been
kept by either of the two states or by the Soviets. The Moscow agreement,
I told him, was simply one more effort to achieve the objective of the Yalta
and Potsdam agreements. At Moscow we had secured what previously the
Soviets had opposed?the agreement to send Ambassador Harriman,
Ambassador Clark Kerr, and Mr. Vyshinski to Rumania to seek ways to
carry out the agreement. The effort might not be successful, I said, but the
result could not be any worse than the previous situation. I asked what he
would have done. I received no information.
Immediately after dinner I asked to be excused because I had to fly back
to Washington; because of the rain and sleet then falling I feared a low
ceiling at Washington. There was no further discussion of our foreign
problems.
The President invited me to come back New Year’s Eve and spend the
night on the ship, and I promised to return.
When I went ashore I found that the sleet had covered the wings of
my plane and it was impossible to use it. Therefore, I had to return to
Washington by automobile. The marine officer who kindly offered to drive
me to Washington found he had undertaken an exceedingly difficult task
as the sleet kept all the windows and windshield of the car covered with
ice. Consequently, it was late when I reached home. That automobile trip,
following the long journey from Moscow, made December 29 a far from
perfect day. But when I walked in the door at home, Mrs. Byrnes handed
me a message that gave the day at least a perfect ending. It was from my
thoughtful friend and counselor, Cordell Hull. It said:
My dear Jim: My heartiest congratulations on the splendid progress
made at the Moscow Conference. Understanding, confidence,
friendliness, and the whole spirit of international co-operation
have been greatly improved by the work of this conference.
The next night I made to the people my radio report on the conference.
I explained the agreements reached and observed that they '‘should bring
hope to the war-weary people of many lands.” I also expressed the belief
that “the meeting in Moscow did serve to bring about better understanding.
When I returned to the President’s ship, the night of the thirty-first, he
congratulated me on the report. He said the party on board had listened
the previous night and considered it a convincing statement.
Within a few days, however, one or two newspaper columnists wrote
that the President had wired me to come to his ship and had expressed
strong disapproval of my agreements. They stated that there was ill feeling
between the President and the Secretary of State. There was a general
understanding among the newspaper correspondents that the information
came from the White House and critics felt encouraged to attack me when
it was rumored that the criticisms were shared by the President’s official
family.
The fact is the President did not on that occasion nor at any other time
express to me disapproval of any position I took at the meetings of the
Council of Foreign Ministers or any other meetings. Nor did he ever express
to me disapproval of any statement I made on our foreign policy.
In the President’s letter to Stalin written before the Moscow Conference,
the President approved most of the proposals agreed to at Moscow.
My experience with the Moscow agreements demonstrated that in the
pursuit of a truly national foreign policy one has to be prepared for criticism
from both the right and the left. Had these agreements been as favorable
to the Soviet Union as some critics have charged, the Soviets would
not have violated them. And the fact that ever since then we have been
protesting against these violations indicates that they were in the best interests
of the liberated states.
However, the person or persons inspiring the stories of dissension between
the President and myself continued their efforts. In at least one
press conference the President denied such dissension, but the stories persisted.
A man who holds public office learns to disregard misrepresentations,
but I admit these untrue stories did not make life any easier for me
in the strenuous days of early 1946.
My hope for united support of our foreign policies received a serious
setback when, on September 12, 1946, while I was in Paris, Secretary of
Commerce Henry A. Wallace made a speech at Madison Square Garden
contending that the policy which had been approved by the President, and
carried out by me, was too harsh to the Soviet Union and that a more conciliatory
approach to them was necessary. I was not greatly surprised by
the Secretary’s action. Previously, he had made a statement to the New
York Times referring to our negotiations with Iceland for the use of the
airfield we had built there. His statement was effectively used by the Communists
in Iceland and it had obstructed the efforts of the State Department
to secure an agreement important to the defense of this hemisphere.
In Paris, the importance of Mr. Wallace’s Madison Square Garden
speech was magnified in the minds of the representatives of foreign governments
by newspaper reports quoting President Truman as saying at a
press conference that he approved the Wallace speech in its entirety. This
report stimulated widespread discussion among the govermental representatives
attending the peace conference; it inspired inquiries to our
representatives in various capitals. Foreign Ministers wondered whether
in my various public statements I had correctly presented American policy.
Senator Vandenberg issued a statement saying that he wanted to cooperate
with the administration but he could co-operate with only one
Secretary of State at a time.
Senator Connally declared that he supported the policy we had announced
and had been following.
I concluded that I should not make a public statement; that the matter
called for correction by the President.
Of course, the position of our delegation was a very unhappy one. So
far as possible, I tried to avoid delegates to the conference or the other
Foreign Ministers because I wanted to avoid answering questions about
whether the policy of our government had changed. Our difficulties were
increased rather than lessened when Mr. Wallace announced on the White
House steps that he and the President had agreed that the Secretary of
Commerce would make no more speeches until after the peace conference.
To the delegates in Paris, this implied that the President had not objected
to a later renewal of his attacks on our foreign policy.
While I had no direct communication with the White House, I learned
of developments from the press and from several messages sent to me by
Assistant Secretary of State Donald Russell. As a result, on September
18, I sent the President a message, reminding him that, on the advice of
a physician, I had given him my resignation in April. By agreement, my
resignation would take effect upon the completion of the treaties. My
message further stated:
“If it is not possible for you, for any reason, to keep Mr. Wallace,
as a member of your Cabinet, from speaking on foreign affairs, it
would be a grave mistake from every point of view for me to continue
in office, even temporarily. Therefore, if it is not completely clear in
your own mind that Mr. Wallace should be asked to refrain from
criticizing the foreign policy of the United States while he is a member
of your Cabinet, I must ask you to accept my resignation immediately.
At this critical time, whoever is Secretary of State must be
known to have the undivided support of your administration and, so
far as possible, of the Congress.
“I shall, of course, remain here until my successor arrives. In case
you are not ready to make that appointment promptly, you can, of
course, appoint someone other than the Secretary of State to head
the United States delegation at the Peace Conference.”
The following day I was informed that the President wished to talk
with me over the telephone. We had difficulty getting a clear signal and
finally I was told that a third party was on the channel and the telephone
company’s operator was unable to “clear the line” for our conversation.
I then asked the President if we might arrange for a teletype conversation.
He kindly consented. There is a teletype instrument in the White
House, and one in our Embassy in Paris. I went to the message room of
our Embassy and dictated to the operator this statement:
I realize that in reaching the agreement announced by Mr. Wallace
yo4 were trying to reconcile the difference in views held by us
on the one hand and by Mr. Wallace on the other.
But Mr. Wallace’s last statement leaves the representatives of
our government abroad, as well as other governments, in more doubt
than ever as to just what American foreign policy will be.
Mr. Wallace has reiterated that he stands by his New York speech
which he does not deny was intended to be critical of our foreign
policy. There is little difference in a member of the Cabinet issuing
to the press statements that he stands by his criticism of your foreign
policy and making such criticisms from a platform.
Mr. Wallace has promised to refrain from speaking until the present
Paris Peace Conference concludes, but the form of his statement
indicates that he will continue to press publicly his own ideas on foreign
policy which differ from your ideas and that you recognize his
right as a member of your Cabinet to do so.
When the administration itself is divided on its own foreign
policy, it cannot hope to convince the world that the American people
have a foreign policy.
The position of the delegation in this particular conference is not
restored by Mr. Wallace’s agreement not to speak during this conference
when he remains a member of your official family and indicates
in effect that he will renew his criticism of your present foreign
policy as soon as the conference is over. We are promised only a moratorium
from criticism of your policies by your own administration.
The world is today in doubt not only as to American foreign policy,
but as to your foreign policy.
This particular peace conference is only a stage in the peace-making
process. The conference makes only recommendations to the Council
of Foreign Ministers which upon the adjournment of the conference
will meet to draft the final treaties. Then while the Foreign Ministers
are at the most critical stage of their negotiations, Mr. Wallace can
resume his public criticisms of our policies and says he will do so.
Moreover, this conference deals only with some of the treaties,
and the making of peace with Germany, Austria and Japan is still
ahead of us. This conference is only a start and nothing done will
have finality if there is not continuity in our foreign policy.
You and I are confronted with most serious problems entirely
disassociated from the conference and demanding unity at home.
When the representatives of other governments know that as soon
as the conference ends we will again have conflicting statements made
by your Secretary of State and your Secretary of Commerce, your
delegation here cannot contribute much to the making of the peace.
As a matter of fact, since these attacks upon us by a member of the
Cabinet, our efforts have been greatly handicapped.
When the conference ends and the Council of Foreign Ministers
meets to make the final decision, each day I would be confronted with
statements of Mr. Wallace in conflict with views expressed by me. I
would then have to insist upon being relieved. It is far better for the
administration to let us come home now, rather than for us to return
October 23, by which date we hope the conference will adjourn.
If Wallace is influenced by any ill feeling toward me it is possible
that if you accept my resignation he might be willing to support your
foreign policies or at least refrain from attacking such policies.
To me the important thing is to try and restore confidence in our
policies.
I sincerely hope that when you appoint someone you can announce
that you are wholeheartedly and undividedly behind the foreign policy
of the United States as it has been heretofore determined by you
and as it is being carried out; that our foreign policy is an American
foreign policy and not the policy of any party or faction; that no
change in American foreign policy is desired or contemplated by you.
If for any reason you wish to modify your policy in any way, I hope
that whatever policy you determine upon you will announce it as the
American policy to which we are going to adhere, and that while a
private citizen can express his views in opposition, that no member
of your cabinet can express views in conflict with your policies.
I have been urging on every Foreign Minister with whom I have
talked that the American policy as fixed by you was a permanent
bipartisan policy and they could rely upon it that it would not be
shifting from time to time and it would not even shift if there were
a change in parties because for the first time we had the co-operation
of the Republicans. Any statement that in six weeks the policy will
be re-examined and discussed with Mr. Wallace whose statements
have caused such consternation will cause these Foreign Ministers to
doubt the stability of our policy.
I respectfully submit that if Mr. Molotov believed that on October
23 there would be a re-examination of the question of permitting
Wallace to again attack your policy he would derive great comfort.
No other member of the Cabinet would claim the right or be allowed
to criticize your policy. The fact that it is not decided now that a man
who stays in the Cabinet must support your policy is bound to hurt
us. The work of our delegation is at a standstill. Representatives of
the other delegations keep our delegation busy asking whether the
administration will permit Wallace to make another speech attacking
us. These governments would never permit a member of the Cabinet
to do such a thing and they cannot understand how we would permit
it unless his views -were shared or there was a serious division of
sentiment among the people. I do not want to ask you to do anything
that would force Mr. Wallace out of the Cabinet. However, I do not
think that any man who professes any loyalty to you would so seriously
impair your prestige and the prestige of the government with
the nations of the world. This is particularly true, if you showed him
telegrams such as we have received from Greece. You and I spent 15
months building a bipartisan policy. We did a fine job convincing the
world that it was a permanent policy upon which the world could rely.
Wallace destroyed it in a day.
It is not proper for me to quote the President’s statements. But I think
it is proper to say that, as a result of the conversation, I knew he did not
intend to change his policies or leave any doubt about his views. He did
not tell me what action he would take. However, the following day the
President settled the matter in a manner satisfactory, I hope, to the overwhelming
majority of the people of the United States.
With the resignation of Secretary Wallace, confidence in the American
policy was restored. Senators Connally and Vandenberg continued to serve
in support of our foreign policy with unswerving loyalty. The Wallace
incident took place during a national campaign which resulted in the
shifting of the majority rule in Congress from the Democrats to the Republicans.
Senator Connally met opposition in his primary election, but
would not abandon his work in Paris where he was helping his country
and come home to help himself. Senator Vandenberg, who also was a
candidate for re-election, not only took no part in the campaign but was
barely able to get back to Michigan to vote; he urged other Republicans
to support the bipartisan foreign policy.
The results of our efforts to maintain a bipartisan foreign policy were
clearly indicated by the overwhelming approval of the Senate in its vote
on June 5, 1947, ratifying the five treaties thus far concluded. When I
was informed of the vote, I could not help but recall again the unhappy
months after World War I when President Wilson struggled with a disgruntled
and determined Senate that finally defeated his efforts for peace.
And I renewed my hope that never again would our policy makers repeat
President Wilson’s mistake; that hereafter the responsible leaders of both
parties would be kept informed of our policies from the beginning of their
formulation to their ultimate conclusion.

The second element in the development and maintenance of a people’s
foreign policy is the caliber of the institution responsible for our foreign
affairs. It has often been popular to use the State Department as a whipping
post for shortcomings in the conduct of our foreign affairs that actually
are due to our own indifference.
The organization and operation of the State Department still needs continuing
study. It grew from an organization that numbered nine hundred
people before the war to one of some 3,000 people who were scattered in
eighteen buildings throughout Washington. A few months after I assumed
office, the personnel of the Department had been almost doubled by the
transfer to it of all or part of such war agencies as the Office of Strategic
Services, the Office of War Information, the Foreign Economic Administration,
and the Surplus Property Administration. The transfer of these
wartime agencies did not make me very happy. The job of acting as
“undertaker” for war agencies necessarily is a bad one. The most capable
people are impelled to leave a dying organization, to find permanent work
with a live and growing organization. Morale sags and problems multiply.
But, more important, I do not believe that functions primarily administrative in character should be assigned to the State Department.
The State Department must be a policy-making department. It cannot
be run like one which is charged with conducting a variety of operations.
The amount of time a Secretary of State must give to decisions on carrying
out operating functions, necessarily is taken away from the important
questions of foreign policy.
Because I thought the State Department should be maintained as a
policy-making department, I opposed the efforts of the War Department
to transfer to the State Department control of our occupation organizations
in Europe and in the Pacific. The State Department is not adapted
for such work. It cannot recruit an efficient organization because the appointees
could, at best, be promised only temporary employment far removed
from their homes. If the burden of carrying on shipping, maintenance
of transportation, policing, inspection and all the myriad duties of
occupation forces were transferred to the State Department, its capacity
to define wisely important foreign policies would Le seriously hampered.
We should retain the efficient organizations that have been developed by
Generals McNarney and Clay in Germany, General Clark in Austria, and
General MacArthur in Japan.
The proponents of the transfer argue that there is a division of authority
between the War Department and the State Department, but I do not
believe the argument is sound. There is such a division in all matters
affecting foreign policy. The President determines our foreign policy.
He makes his decisions upon the recommendations of the Secretary of
State. The policy as determined must be executed by the War and Navy
departments whose personnel, by training and experience, are best qualified
to conduct the necessary operations. Until there is a treaty of peace,
the job of occupation is as much the job of the Army as is the job of
making war. Of course, it is a disagreeable task, but the army of no other
power has quit the job and our army should not.
There must, of course, always be close co-ordination between the State,
War and Navy departments. A policy which, in today’s world, is not defined
with one eye on our power to back it up, is hardly a policy at all.
Since the early days of the war not only have the Secretaries of State,
War and Navy held frequent consultations but a Co-ordinating Committee
made up of representatives from these three departments meets regularly
to consider common problems.
In February 1946, I agreed to a proposal made by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff which eventually will greatly promote the efforts to achieve coordination.
This was the proposal to establish the National War College
as a combined training institution for high ranking officers of State, War
and Navy. It began its operations July 1, 1946. Foreign service officers
have been assigned to the college and the new institution is already doing
a most effective work.
In October 1945,1 proposed that the President issue an executive order
establishing a Council of National Defense consisting of the Secretaries
of State, War and Navy, so that our foreign and our defense policies could
be fully co-ordinated. The draft order provided that the Chief of Staff of
the Army and the Chief of Naval Operations serve as advisers to the
Council on military matters. In addition to maintaining its own secretariat,
the council also would have under it a unified intelligence service. The
proposal was never approved, but many of its objectives were incorporated
into the legislation to merge the Army and Navy into a Department of
National Defense. As this legislation is put into practice, the problem of
co-ordinating our foreign and our military policies must be given continuing
study.
One who was Secretary of State a total of 562 days, 350 of which were
spent at international conferences, cannot claim to have effected many
fundamental changes in an institution like the State Department. In fact,
during the early months of my tenure we made a conscious effort to help
the Department recover from an acute attack of “reorganization jitters.”
But one innovation was introduced. It did not win any public attention
but I regard it as one of the more significant undertakings in the conduct
of our foreign affairs.
When I became Secretary, I attempted to obtain a broad statement of
our policy. I thought there should be a basic operating guide for a realistic
foreign policy. No such document had been drawn up. Many officials of
the State Department could outline our policy for a particular area, but
it was readily apparent that the statement was only their idea of what our
policy was. There was no authoritative text, duly considered and approved,
which set forth our national objectives the world over. I asked
that the formulation of statements of policy be given a top priority in
the work of the Department.
Country committees for every nation in the world were created. These
committees sought to draw up a rounded program that tied our political,
economic, intelligence and information activities into a commonly conceived
program. After this group had prepared a draft statement it was
sent to our Missions abroad for review and criticism. It was my opinion
that too much policy was determined without consulting the man on the
spot who was in daily contact with the situation in that country. Also,
I thought, if he helped to shape the policy he would be better able to follow
a consistent program. Certain of the larger Embassies received many
or all of the statements for comment. When the suggestions from the
field had been received and studied a final policy statement was prepared
by the men who lived with these problems. As they were approved, these
became our operating guides. To meet changing conditions, I directed
that these policy statements be reviewed and revised every six months.
There is little sense in determining policy in the Department unless
that policy is made known to our representatives throughout the world.
In past years I have visited Embassies where the representatives of our
State Department and the Navy and Army attaches each had different
opinions about our government’s policy toward that particular country.
When our own people didn’t know our policy, one could not expect a
foreign government to know it. Copies of our policy statements were also
sent to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
When these “country” statements were completed, I asked that “area”
committees be set up to review the policies set forth for each country
in that area to make sure that our aims were consistent. At this point, we
decided to bring in fresh minds to review the statements with critical detachment.
The “area” committee for Latin America was the first one
created. It was composed of Professors Samuel F. Bemis of Yale University,
Dana G. Munro of Princeton University, and Dexter Perkins of
the University of Rochester, all of them outstanding scholars of Latin-
American diplomacy. I had not had an opportunity to extend this program
further when my resignation became effective.
I was glad to be able to hand to Secretary Marshall statements of
American foreign policy on every country in the world and covering
every facet of our interests. He may differ with some of those policies,
but at least he can determine definitely and in a few minutes what they
are, and change them to accord with his views.
These statements carry an added advantage. They require the development
of a consistent program of action. And they force the responsible
officers to look ahead, to plan for the crises of tomorrow.
The best planned organization, however, depends for its strength on
the caliber of its people.
Immediately after becoming Secretary I found that attending conferences
abroad made it impossible for me to attend many staff meetings so
I requested Under Secretary Acheson to preside at these meetings. Each
morning he met with the office directors of the Department. While I was
abroad Mr. Acheson kept me informed about any important problems
considered by the group. When I was home, he would confer with me
about them, usually late in the afternoon. It was seldom that either of us
left the Department before seven o’clock. I could not have devoted myself
so completely to the task of peace making in the conferences abroad had
I not known the work of the Department was being efficiently carried
on under the direction of a man with the unusual ability and energy of
Under Secretary Acheson.
I want to pay tribute also to the generally high quality of the men who
have made the diplomatic service their career. The vast majority of the
career foreign service officers I have met are able, conscientious, hardworking
men, capable of earning far more than the comparatively low
salaries our government has paid them.
And I would like to destroy the legend of the diplomat as a stripedpants
cookie pusher. Today’s diplomat knows that the social graces are
far less valuable to him than the ability to work intensively for long hours
with little opportunity for rest or relaxation. Members of my staff at the
various international gatherings more than once found themselves working
around the clock. The fact is that during my year and a half as Secretary
of State, out of all the men in the service of the Department who
called on me, I can recall only two who arrived wearing striped trousers
and spats?and those two were political appointees!
It should be clear, then, that I intend no disparagement when I say
that our foreign service was, and to a large extent, still is inadequate for
the tasks we must discharge in world affairs. I am particularly pleased
that during my period as Secretary of State action was taken to help
remedy this situation. The passage of the Kee-Connally bill “to improve,
strengthen, and expand the Foreign Service,” which was signed by the
President on August 13, 1946, was the first legislation dealing with foreign
service personnel in twenty-two years?a period which brought vast
changes in the scope and responsibilities of our foreign service.
Work to obtain this legislation had been started under Secretary Hull
and was continued by Secretary Stettinius. It was pending before Congress
when the Council of Foreign Ministers adjourned its first session
in Paris on May 16 and was one of the reasons why I resisted the temptation
to take a vacation during the one-month recess and returned home
instead. Long experience had taught me that in Congress, as in other
places, things do not happen unless somebody makes them happen.
With Assistant Secretary Donald Russell, I went to the Congress and
enlisted the aid of friends. Thanks again to the co-operation of both political
parties, the bill was given special handling to insure a vote before
adjournment and was adopted in both the House and the Senate by unanimous
consent. It marked a long step forward toward the fulfillment of
the second objective I have stated.
As a result of this act, salaries can be raised so that no longer will it
be necessary to appoint men of wealth as our Ambassadors. At the same
time that salaries were advanced all down the line, more rigid requirements
on training and promotion were provided. The bill seeks to make
our foreign service truly representative of our government and people
by making it possible for the best qualified men and women in the country,
in or out of the government, to have tours of duty with the foreign service
in any of its ranks. Among the most important provisions, in my opinion,
was one that calls for more frequent and varied assignments in this country.
Its purpose is to prevent these sentinels of the United States from
losing touch with American life. I recall Woodrow Wilson saying, “It is
easy to send an American to London or Paris, but it is hard to keep an
American there.” A man who represents his country abroad, no less than
the man who represents his people in Congress, needs to return frequently
to the “grass roots.”
In other ways, too, the State Department is becoming increasingly
sensitive to public opinion. Each day a digest of representative newspaper
editorials and opinions of radio commentators is placed on the desks
of Department officials and sent to our missions overseas. Letters and
petitions from individuals and organizations are analyzed for evidence of
opinion trends. The Public Liaison Division, for example, keeps in touch
with all types of voluntary organizations throughout the country, not only
to help them keep informed on foreign affairs but to get their criticism
and suggestions on pending issues. Behind these efforts is the firm realization
that our foreign policy must be responsive to and have the firm support
of the American people.
A basic prerequisite to a people’s foreign policy is, of course, a well-informed
public. In the field of international relations the world is still
suffering a hangover from the era when international agreements were
secret and private arrangements between rulers. But the United States,
at least, is rapidly leaving the habits of that era far behind.
The war interrupted the trend away from secret diplomacy. Military
and political agreements then were often so interrelated, secrecy was required
in the interests of the war effort. All the meetings between President
Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and Generalissimo Stalin were
held in secrecy with the press excluded. Although many newspapermen
may have learned indirectly of the conferences, the discussions and the
agreements, they refrained from publishing them in accordance with the
wartime voluntary press censorship.
But at Potsdam, even though the war in the Pacific was still continuing,
the press was restless under the agreement denying them information on
what was occurring at the conference. American newspapers and radio networks
had many representatives stationed in Berlin to cover the conference.
However, the suburb of Potsdam, which was the scene of the conference,
was in the Russian zone, and they were not permitted to go
there. The press complained bitterly, but they received no detailed report
until the President returned and made his report to Congress. Because
of the agreements in connection with the Japanese war, some secrecy
was thoroughly justified. But since then I have often wished that more
information could, at that time, have been supplied our people on European
problems.
When the Council of Foreign Ministers met in London, there was no
military reason for secrecy. But the best arrangement we could secure
was for a daily issuance of a communique containing the subjects discussed
and any agreement reached. It did not, however, report the statements
or positions of individual members. This seemed an advance over
Potsdam, but it turned out to be no advance at all. Each Minister assigned a
representative to a committee charged with the drafting of a communique.
But the communique, like everything else, required unanimous agreement.
The Council itself reached so few agreements that there was little
for the committee to report except the debates, which were prohibited material.
Under these circumstances, the correspondents did the only thing
they could do?tried to get information from someone connected with
the delegations who presumably had been instructed not to give it. Consequently,
the reports of the meetings not only were inadequate but were
often inaccurate.
Trouble began with the very first communique. The Soviet representative
did not want to give out any statement. The others argued that a
communique should be issued stating at the very least that the Council
had agreed to take up the Italian treaty and would begin with the study of
a text submitted by the British delegation. After a long argument, the
Soviet representative finally agreed to the release of the following uninformative
communique:
The Council of Foreign Ministers held its second meeting at 4
p.m. and adjourned at 6:30 p.m. Owing to the number of documents
which have to be translated and studied it was decided to meet next
at 11 o’clock on Friday instead of tomorrow as planned.
A soothsayer rather than a reporter was required to get any news out
of a statement like that. Similar statements followed. Our communiques
were shorter than the average weather report and soon an effort was
made to make them less accurate than one.
The Council had discussed a complaint from the Soviet Union that
France was failing to repatriate Soviet citizens. France in turn complained
that the Soviet Union continued to refuse to repatriate nationals
of France. That evening the communique contained no information other
than this simple statement of subjects discussed. It was unanimously
agreed to by the members of the Press Committee. But later that night,
about eleven o’clock, a Soviet representative told Mr. Walter Brown, who
represented the United States on the Press Committee, that Mr. Molotov
objected to the communique and wanted it held up. Mr. Brown replied
that it had already been given out by the representative of the United
Kingdom who was serving as chairman for that day.
Next morning, Mr. Molotov complained to the council. Mr. Bevin
stated that the chairman of the committee had issued the communique as
a result of unanimous agreement. Mr. Molotov replied, “My actions cannot
be controlled by any secretary or representative on a committee.” He
insisted that the council should issue another communique eliminating
reference to France’s complaint that the Soviets failed to repatriate French
nationals. Mr. Bidault objected. Mr. Bevin and I maintained that it would
be an incorrect statement of the proceedings; that the communique had
correctly stated the facts and that we would not agree to issue
a second one. Mr. Molotov stated that under such circumstances he would
put out a communique of his own. And he did so.
Later I learned that it was important to him to issue another communique
because the previous night he had wired Moscow to prohibit the
publication of the committee’s communique in any newspaper in the Soviet
Union. Consequently, Moscow expected a substitute communique. Mr.
Molotov’s personal communique, therefore, was the only statement on
the proceedings of the council that was released to the Soviet press.
The London press arrangements greatly embarrassed me because I had
known many of the correspondents covering the conference during much
of my public life. Some of them I knew from my days in the Senate, while
others I had come to know since I had been in the White House and the
State Department.
One day I met a group of them in the lobby. An old friend addressed
me as “Senator,” and asked whether I wanted to be called Senator, Justice
or Secretary. I told him it made little difference, because I knew at
that time the press representatives were not calling me any one of those
three names.
When we went to Moscow in December we had the same arrangement
we had had in London. I did not like it, but the meeting in Moscow was
called at my request. I wanted to progress with the peace, and I did not
feel I was in a position to dictate terms on press arrangements to the government
I had asked to be our host. This was particularly true since any
satisfactory arrangement would necessitate the Soviet Government’s altering
its own censorship rules. Once again, the communique furnished
very little news and once again the people of the world received many
incorrect impressions about the proceedings of the Council and the arguments
leading up to the decisions.
During the discussion of the Iranian case at the Security Council in
New York, for the first time it was possible to meet freely with the correspondents
and frankly tell them the problems we faced. The proceedings
in the Council were opened to the public and I refused to be bound by any
pledges of secrecy in the closed meetings. I met with the correspondents
and explained to them, for their background information, our view of the
situation. When I couldn’t do it, I designated a member of my staff to do
it for me. The result wTas that the public received accounts that were written
with full knowledge and understanding. And the force of public
opinion thus stimulated was a vital factor in the ultimate outcome of the
case.
I decided that what was good in the Security Council would be good
also in the Council of Foreign Ministers. I realized I couldn’t do the
task myself and that I needed an officer who was familiar with all phases
of our foreign relations and whose relationship to me was close enough to
enable him to be fully informed on all issues so that he could properly
interpret those with news value to the press. I persuaded Charles E.
Bohlen to accept the assignment. Chip was not only a veteran foreign
service officer but he had spent several years in Moscow, spoke Russian
fluently, and had acted as interpreter for President Roosevelt and President
Truman at all their international conferences. Chip and Michael J.
McDermott, who for many years has handled press relations for the State
Department capably and courteously, made an effective team.
When the Council of Foreign Ministers met in Paris, I told the Ministers
that I would not again agree to the previous press arrangements
and that I would insist on our right to give the press the American point of
view on every proposal before the council. I was determined that, if the
meetings of the council were to continue to be closed, so far as the American
delegation was concerned, they would not be secret meetings.
After every session, Chip and Mike would meet with the press and
“brief” them on everything of importance that had taken place. The newspapermen,
of course, would have preferred to be present at the meetings
but they soon learned that they were receiving objective, accurate and
constructive reports. They recognized that closed meetings sometimes
were helpful in reaching agreement; most of them were willing to sacrifice
attendance at the meetings, particularly since they soon realized that
our action was forcing other delegations to take similar action.
During the Paris session the council held several “private” meetings
at which the Minister was accompanied only by two advisers in addition
to his interpreter. At the first of these, it was suggested that we withhold
from the press everything that took place in these gatherings. I refused.
I said, “In the first place, I think it wrong. In the second place, the agreement
will not be kept. Somebody present will advise other members of
his delegation of what has taken place and then the information will leak
to a favorite correspondent.”
I had been bitten by that dog before. I told them that at London I had
tried to live up to such an agreement. Then, I had read in the New York
Herald Tribune an absolutely correct description of the events of the
previous day. I was embarrassed at the next meeting, assuming I would
be charged with having “leaked” the story. Upon investigation I learned
that the correspondent had gotten his information from a person connected
with the Herald Tribune office in Paris.
I told them of similar experiences in London. A true story in an American
newspaper came, my press representative learned, from information
supplied by an official in the British Foreign Office. Shortly thereafter,
an enterprising reporter secured a story for the Chicago Sun, which was
a correct statement of a debate in the council, from a representative of
Tass, the Soviet news agency.
The London experience was enough for me, I told my colleagues, and
consequently I would not again join in any agreement that would prevent
me from giving the press information about the American position.
From then on, the press could give the people accurate reports on the
progress, or lack of progress, in the council as it appeared from the American
point of view. This stimulated the others to present their point of
view. I was glad to observe this development, because it placed the position
of the individual countries on the various issues precisely where they
belonged?before the bar of public opinion.
Eventually, even Mr. Molotov was influenced by this example. In
July, when he made his important speech announcing the Soviet program
for Germany, he adopted our custom. Mimeographed copies of his speech
?which was delivered in a closed session?were distributed to the press
in advance. When I learned of this action, I congratulated him. Since
then, both Mr. Molotov and Mr. Gromyko, in his work at the United
Nations, have frequently followed this course. Mr. Gromyko, I understand,
now even calls in various newspaper correspondents to explain to
them, as background information, the Soviet point of view on questions
before the United Nations.
When the peace conference convened in Paris, I proposed that the
press and radio representatives be admitted to all meetings. My motion
was seconded by Mr. Molotov, who declared he was heartily in favor
of it. I felt my efforts to remove the curtain from the peace negotiations
had at last succeeded. My satisfaction was not lessened by the intensive
efforts of the Soviet delegation and its satellites to use the conference
proceedings for propaganda purposes.
In one of Mr. Molotov’s propaganda attacks, he charged that the
United States and the United Kingdom were violating agreements to
support the adoption of certain conference-procedure rules. This was so
baseless that I replied with a very sharp speech in which I repeatedly
cited the record to prove that his assertions were without foundation. And
after each citation I would say: “Only Mr. Molotov would make such
charges.” Toward the end of the speech I referred to our free press and
assured Mr. Molotov it would print his charges impugning the motives
of the United States. I then added:
“I challenge him to permit publication in the Soviet Union of the statement
I have now made. . . . Today we have only admiration and respect
for the people of the Soviet Republics and we will not permit that admiration
and respect to be lessened by any attack by Mr. Molotov.”
Within forty-eight hours my speech appeared in the Soviet press. As
far as I know, it was the first and last time a speech of mine was so honored.
I only regret it had to be a speech criticizing Air. Molotov.
In New York, when Mr. Molotov invited the council to meet in Moscow,
I agreed, provided the press would be free to report the proceedings
as they had the council sessions in Paris and New York. He agreed, saying
that Moscow’s serious housing shortage would impose the only limitation.
In a private conversation I tried to get assurances that radio correspondents
would be included. Radio, he said, presented a different
problem and he would have to take it up with his government. Later he
said that the radio correspondents would be allowed to report from Moscow.
The correspondents agree that Mr. Molotov fulfilled his promise to
keep their dispatches free from censorship.
Early in 1946, I determined to find some way of telling the Russians
and the people of the Soviet satellite states the truth about our position
on matters affecting world peace. In all these countries our position was
being misrepresented daily. I did not want a vehicle for propaganda but
we were engaged in a battle for the minds of the people and I did want
a method of making factual statements to correct untruths. The only possibility
seemed to be to increase the power of our radio station at Munich.
When I told General Clay of my keen interest in the subject, he went
to work on it. Assistant Secretary William Benton, with his energy and
resourcefulness, also became active. He sent engineers to Munich to determine
what was necessary to improve the equipment and perfect an
organization. Additional equipment was transported from England where
we had been using it during the war.
Between the first and second sessions of the Council of Foreign Ministers
in Paris, I returned to Washington. While there, I was invited by
some of my former colleagues of the Senate Appropriations Committee to
discuss with them my proposal to add 18 million dollars to the State Department
appropriation bill to carry on the Department’s information
work, including the operation of “The Voice of America.” Some Senators
expressed doubt about the wisdom of the appropriation because they felt
that the views of some of the persons engaged in the work were too liberal,
if not radical.
I explained that these employees had been transferred to the State Department from wartime agencies, that they were protected by civil service
and could be removed only in accordance with civil service rules. The result
was the enactment of the McCarran Amendment which gave the Secretary
power to remove employees for the good of the service. I assured
the Senators that a thorough investigation would be made of the personnel
to be sure of their sympathies and loyalties. They then granted the full
appropriation.
Before returning to Paris, I issued instructions for the investigation.
Believing that prosecutors should not be judges, I directed that the investigators
should present to an independent committee which had nothing
to do with the investigation the evidence believed sufficient to justify
removal. As a result of the recommendations of this committee, a number
of employees have been removed under the authority of the McCarran
Amendment.
Once again, serious opposition to the continuation of this program has
arisen in Congress. As this is written, the outcome still is in doubt. It
will be most unfortunate if Congress does not make an adequate appropriation
for this work. I spent many hours helping to develop this program
because I thought it very important to have some means of answering the
false charges made against the United States. It is not enough for us to
be conscious of the purity of our motives and the innocence of our actions.
It is necessary that we convince the world.
While we are appropriating hundreds of millions of dollars to aid other
countries, it would be wise to spend a few million to protect the good name
of the United States.
One small but important technical barrier to the free flow of information
to the public is the desire of many officials to “overclassify” documents.
Every army officer has encountered the problem and I imagine
many of them have shared my experience of receiving material taken from
a newspaper with “confidential” marked over it, and in some cases even
“secret.” I found altogether too many State Department documents that
were classified “top secret” when they did not merit even a “secret” classification.
Since the war was over, I issued instructions to liberalize the
classification of all messages. I am afraid that I did not make much progress.
It will take some time to change the habits of years, but changed
they must be.
Early in 1946 I found another way to remove diplomatic exchanges
from the realm of secrecy. On February 28, instead of sending a “note,” I
made a speech setting forth our position on existing problems. I hoped it
would result in bringing into the open the discussion of those problems.
I followed this with other speeches and my efforts were more successful
than I had expected. Thereafter, not only did the Soviet officials speak
publicly explaining their position on current problems but Generalissimo
Stalin began giving newspaper interviews to correspondents of the United
States and the United Kingdom.
There are, of course, some matters between governments which should
not be discussed in this manner but, after all, there are not very many
of these. This decision, as well as my decision not to agree again to secret
conferences, was based on a conviction I reluctantly reached on the attitude
of the Soviet Government. If, at the time of the London Conference,
the American people had known about the communications exchanged
by President Roosevelt and President Truman with Generalissimo Stalin,
which I have reported in preceding chapters, they would have better understood
the difficulties I encountered at London. Certainly, the people
would have been more sympathetic with my position.
After the London Conference, in justice to our position, I was forced to
describe in my radio report some of the difficulties we encountered. I did
not tell all that I have now told because I still hoped and wanted to believe
that the Soviets were moved by the same common purpose that
moved us?the desire for an early peace. Whenever persons representing
their own interests or the interests of their governments meet in conference
and have a common purpose, it is advisable to minimize differences
on methods in order to reconcile those differences more easily. This was
the thought that President Roosevelt expressed just before he died when
he advised Churchill to minimize our difficulties with the Soviets in his
public address.
At Moscow I still hoped that the Soviet Union and the United States
had a common purpose. However, by the latter part of January 1946,
there was accumulated evidence that regardless of what might be their
long-term plan, certainly their immediate purpose was to delay the peace
in Europe and in the Pacific.
Stalin’s speech on February 9, 1946, in which he announced the new
Five-Year Plan with its emphasis on rearmament instead of the production
of consumer goods the Russian people need so badly, was a shock to
me. But even more threatening was the Soviet attitude toward Iran, the
evidence of their willingness to violate the sovereignty of their little
neighbor. It confirmed the ambition Molotov had expressed to Hitler for
the control of the territory south of Baku. These things inspired my
speeches beginning in February 1946, speeches which were correctly interpreted
as reflecting a firmer attitude toward the Soviet Government.
No longer was there any wisdom in minimizing our differences because
no longer was there any justification for the belief that we were animated
by the common purpose of an early peace.
And no longer was it necessary to minimize our differences because of
the condition of our armed forces. In the fall of 1945 the American Army
point system of discharges left us with only skeleton divisions. As Director
of War Mobilization, I had approved that system because I thought
it fair and because I assumed the world would want peace quickly and
permanently. However, it meant that the most experienced men were
among the first to be discharged. Key men in all divisions were discharged
at about the same time. Some of the people who yelled the loudest for me to
adopt a firm attitude toward Russia, yelled even louder for the rapid demobilization
of the Army. Theodore Roosevelt once wisely said, “Uncle
Sam should speak softly and carry a big stick.” My critics wanted me to
speak loudly and carry a twig.
With the turn of the year the reorganization of the Army was under
way and there was no longer reason for withholding from the people full
information as to our differences with the Soviets.
With that decision there had to be a change in our information policy.
The people had to know what was going on else we could not hope for
their support. Thereafter, by speeches, daily conferences between Mr.
Bohlen, Mr. McDermott and the correspondents, and by the frequent
meetings I held with the correspondents, we kept the people fully informed
of our relations and our negotiations with the Soviet Government.
I continue to think that, if we are to have a lasting peace, it must be a
people’s peace. The people can exert their full influence in the conduct of
foreign affairs only if they know more about them.
That basic democratic right, the right of the people to know, must be
applied increasingly to the conduct of foreign affairs. If that right is essential?
as I believe it is?to the functioning of democracy here at home,
it is at least equally necessary to apply it in the field of foreign affairs
where the need for knowledge and understanding is so much greater.
To carry this policy into action involves a break with the diplomatic
habits of the past. Such habits are not easily broken. Time, effort, and
a constant demand by the public to know what is happening will be needed.
People cannot act intelligently if, in all matters of importance affecting
our relations with other governments, they are kept in the dark.
Let there be light?and lots of it!