The Great Contradiction in Russia


THE new Soviet nationalism is more
than a joke. Certainly it is funny,
and also pathetic, to see the drab,
inarticulate millions of Stalin's Russia being told in every article, in every broadcast, in every slogan, that they, the new
Soviet man and the new Soviet woman,
are immeasurably superior to all other
people on earth. It is easy to laugh at the
new Soviet hero of Russian plays and
films, the Bolshevik reincarnation of Victorian fantasies. And in the incessant
claims by Soviet researches for Russian
priority in an ever-growing list of inventions, from wireless telegraphy to penicillin, from jet engines to dairy farming,
there is material for a whole string of
highly finished farces. Indeed, it is impossible not to laugh; yet behind the comedy
is one of the most important developments
of our time.
I don't mean the threat of neo-jingoism.
Admittedly, there are aspects of this new
nationalism which have a sinister look, especially when expressed in terms of
massed military display. But in fact it is
the very reverse of a threat. It is a confession of failure and of weakness. In the
domestic sphere, Soviet patriotism is nothing more than a feverish effort in face of
heavy odds to create in a fatalistic and
self-doubting people a belief in their own
superior capacity and destiny. And the
very intensity of the effort reflects the
weight of the resistance, In the international sphere the new Soviet nationalism
(which is not the same as Soviet patriotism) reflects an internal contradiction in
the Marxist-Leninist system no less real
and effective than the celebrated internal
contradictions of capitalist society which
are supposed to bring about its downfall.

IN the first, fine careless days of Bolshevism, life for the faithful had a simplicity which has never been recaptured. The
task was to destroy; and in this matter of
destruction the early Bolsheviks enjoyed
a unanimity they were never again to
know. It started in Russia. The last
traces of the old world had to be wiped
out as the foundations of the new were
being laid. But it was not to be limited to
Russia. The old order everywhere had to
?go, and in some places faster than in
others: if it did not, how could Russia, in
backward isolation, hold her own against
the forces of international reaction?
One of the things that had to be destroyed was the bourgeois concept of nationalism. The Bolsheviks were pledged
to its overthrow. They had discarded the
Second International because it had not
been international enough, its most stalwart members in Germany and France
preferring to fight each other in 1914
rather than unite against their respective
Governments. Now the Bolsheviks, with
Lenin at their head, had the Third and the
"International" was the anthem of the
new Russia.
The Bolsheviks also had a slogan taken
from the Communist Manifesto of 1848:
"Workers of the World Unite And this
slogan was taken as the motto of the new
Russia, to go with the emblem of the hammer and sickle superimposed upon the
globe.
Indeed, there was no new Russia. Russia had gone; to be replaced by a federation of Socialist Soviet Republics, which
were to increase in number until they covered the whole world. Great Russia happened to be the senior republic of them
all; but Lenin and many of his colleagues
©¢id not think of themselves as Russians
first: they thought of themselves as leaders of an international conspiracy which
had moved its headquarters from Zurich
to the Smolny Institute in Petrograd-
now Leningrad-and thence to the Moscow Kremlin. Russia, their own Russia,
was, rather surprisingly, their first conquest; but at all costs the process had to
be continued. They set the greatest of
store by the workers of Germany.

IT is not at all clear in detail what sort
of a relationship between a Bolshevik Russia and a Bolshevik Germany they had in
mind: it was never put to the test. But
one thing is certain, and that is that it
would never have occurred to Lenin or
Trotsky to rule Germany from Moscow
through the agency of their own domestic
Government. There would have been a supra-national committee on which German
representation would have been as strong
as Russian; and that committee would
have laid down its policy for Bolshevik
governments everywhere, including Russia,
In a word, the Comintern would have
become the nucleus of a kind of world government, and the German and Russian
Central Committees, with their Politbureaus, would have been subordinate to it.
The logical extension of this line of
thought to present-day conditions would
make the Cominform the supreme council of Russia and all the Communist states
of eastern Europe, with the governments
of those states, including Russia, as its instruments. Thus, the voices of Czechs and
Poles would help
to determine the domestic policy of Poland and Czechoslovakia,
This has not happened. Instead, we find that the countries of eastern Europe have
become the satellites of a
great power which dominates
the Cominform and uses it as
an instrument of state for its
own ends. The Moscow Central Committee, exclusively
Russian in complexion, runs
the Soviet Union without help
or interference from outside.
It also runs the Cominform
and, through this, with greater
or less directness, the satellite
governments.

BUT the slogan remains:
"Workers of the World Unite!"
It is printed religiously on the
front page of Pravda every
©¢ay or the year. The invitation today, however, is to unite
under the leadership of Stalin.
And Stalin is no longer an international revolutionary with
his headquarters fortuitously
set up in Moscow; he is the
head of a great power.
Today the "International"
has been superseded as the anthem of the Russians by a
hymn to the fatherland. Today Communists all over the
world are openly instructed
that the criterion of Marxist
orthodoxy has nothing to do
with Marxist theory but is loyalty to the Soviet Union, the
Socialist fatherland. Today the
citizens of the U.S.S.R. are
told of their superiority to all
other people in the world, and,
by implication, that this superiority goes back to the days
before the Revolution.
Today a fanatical and orthodox Communist
Government, the Tito Government of
Yugoslavia, is excommunicated and abused more violently
than any capitalist government for no other reason than
that it has ideas of its own
about the development of its
own revolution and objects to
being told what to do in detail
and at every stage by the Government of the U.S.S.R. and
for the benefit of the U.S.S.R.
What has gone wrong?
From Lenin's point of view,
two things have gone wrong.
First, the Russians have remained obstinately Russian;
second, an armchair theory
proved inadequate in practice.
And the two are intertwined.

IF I had to point to a single
Toot cause of all the anomalies, real and apparent, in the
Kremlin's domestic and foreign policy, I think I should
bring up a fact which expresses the fatal weakness of
the whole Bolshevik system:
the contradiction between the
short-term and the long-term
demands of world revolution.
This contradiction has been
complicated almost out of recognition by peculiarities of
Russia and the Russian people; but it underlies everything else.
The long-term demands of
the Revolution involve the
spread of chaos and confusion
all over the world, leading to
the strengthening and ultimate victory of Communist
parties everywhere. The short-
term demands, on the other
hand, involve the consolidation of the Communist party
inside Russia and the strengthening of the Soviet Union as a
great power. It is plain that
what is good for the Soviet
economy as such may not always be good for the rapid advance of global communism,
And it is here that the great
contradiction is found.

TO take an elementary example: when the Kremlin was
required to import large quantities of machine tools for its
industrialization program,
these could come only from
America, Britain, or some
other highly developed capitalist country. Thus it was bad
policy for the Communists to
induce strikes and industrial
unrest in the machine-tool exporting countries. Yet, if these
were allowed to develop their
productivity unhampered by
Communist agitation, the coming of world revolution was
thereby postponed.
This, as I have said, in only
an elementary example of the
contradictions between the
long-term and the short-term
demands of the Revolution, It
actually occurred in the Thirties, when the world Communist movement was ruthlessly
sacrificed to the Soviet Five-
Year Plans, and Stalin, committed to his program of ¡°socialism in one country," was
starving his own people at
home and breaking the hearts
of his disciples abroad in order to import the machinery
and foreign technicians which
were to enable him, in 1941, to
stand up to the Germans.

BUT such dilemmas have
constantly presented themselves to the Bolshevik statesmen during the past thirty
years; and the vain attempt to
resolve them with the least
harm to Russia today and to
the prospects of global communism tomorrow has been
the history of Soviet policy. It
began in the very early days
of the Revolution inside Russia itself, first with Lenin's
concessions to the peasants to
get them on his side, then with
his New Economic Policy,
which permitted a partial restoration of private enterprise
to save the country from
breakdown. It has continued
ever since both in the domestic and the
international spheres. Stalin's sacrifice of
the German Communists to
the Nazis was an extreme example.
What is quite clear is that
from the moment when Stalin
decided that a strong Russia
was the first need, regardless,
of what happened to the Communists outside Russia, the
short-term interests (which
happen to coincide with the interests of Russia as a power)
have invariably taken precedence over the long-term interests of the Revolution.
This bias, indeed, goes back
to pre-Stalin days when, for
the sake of a strong Russia,
the various component republics of the U.S.S.R. itself, instead of being allowed to develop as voluntary partners
with the Great Russian republic in a Socialist federation,
were soon, for the sake of security, subordinated absolutely to the dictation of a central
Moscow Government. And this
bias, so completely in keeping
not-only with the Russian governmental tradition but also
with real needs, has now become a habit of mind, so that
it can be truthfully said that a
strong Soviet state has become an end in itself instead
of a means to an end. It is
this situation which has now
crystallized in the current attitude that loyalty to communism means loyalty to the
U.S.S.R.

I AM not for a moment suggesting that Stalin and his
friends have abandoned all
idea of world revolution. Far
from it: they are working toward it and regard its coming
in some remote future as axiomatic. I am not even suggesting that the ideal of world
revolution is consciously pursued today no longer as an end
in itself but only as an adjunct of Soviet imperial pol-
icy. For this would be to over-
simplify and to credit the
Kremlin leaders with a capacity for clear-sighted, all-embracing planning unprecedented in the history of government.
What I am suggesting is
that the Kremlin leaders are
conducting an improvised and
hand-to-mouth policy which is
no less muddled and self-contradictory when it comes to
first principles than the policies of any other power, the
only difference being that in
the case of the Kremlin great
efforts are made to rationalize
all actions after they have
happened and to fit them into
the Marxist-Leninist theory,
no matter how sharp their incompatability. There is no 
doubt at all that the Russians
are aware of at least some of
these contradictions, and that
they believe implicitly in their
capacity to ride two horses at
once, to prepare the way to
truth through lies, to work for
the victory of the world proletariat through the aggrandizement of the U.S.S.R.

BUT equally there is no
doubt that in this matter they
delude themselves. There is a
limit to the capacity of the human mind for calculated and
long drawn-out maneuvers. It
is easy to convince one's self
that one is retreating in order
to jump farther but there
comes a time when retreat is
absolute. And what has happened in Soviet Russia is that
for so long and in so many
ways the Kremlin has been
putting the Kremlin and Russia first that, with the best
will in the world, it cannot
now do otherwise. Not only
has it lost control of the situation, but also it has created
a new generation of Russians
who have never known the
original enthusiasm for perpetual revolution, who think
in terms not of the world but
of Russia versus the world.
And this outlook is being
strengthened.

THUS, having for good or
bad reasons cut themselves off
utterly from the West, the Bolsheviks are now committed to
keeping abreast with the West
by their own unaided efforts.
By this we mean the unaided
efforts of what is still essentially a peasant population
flinging itself bravely, and being cruelly flung, into toil and
privation in the name of Soviet progress and led by technicians and managers who
themselves, less than twenty
years ago, were receiving their
first lessons in modern industrial technique from visiting
experts.
These masses were badly
shaken by the war, its misery
and the untold destruction to
their laboriously built economy; they were shaken again
by multitudinous glimpses of
the technical superiority and
better living standards of the
West. Weary, exhausted, driven, disillusioned, in part de-
moralized, traditionally fatalistic, self-distrustful and eager
to bow to the superior skills of
the foreigner, they have now
at all costs to be bullied into
a conviction of their own superiority, of the superiority of
the Soviet way of life, and of
their own ultimate 
victory
over the forces of reaction.

FOR today the Soviet Union
must stand or fall by the efforts of the Russian people,
and the self-doubt of the ordinary Russian may be measured by the lunatic intensity
of the Government's efforts to
reassure him. To these efforts
the painters, the novelists, the
dramatists are all without exception harnessed; while in
science and technology teams
of researchers work through
the files of ancient scientific
journals to turn up the rough
experiments of forgotten Czarist scientists.
Such discoveries
used to prove that even in
Czarist days, when all the
world regarded Russia as a
backward nation, and when all
educated Russians despised
their country's own achievement, when the language of
culture was French, and when
all culture was foreign-that
even then there were gifted
and honest Russian inventors
thinking up for themselves all
the vaunted discoveries of the
West but unable to make their
voices heard.
This is the background to
the present wave of Soviet jingo-patriotism. It is simple and
it is sad. For all the high-
flown pseudo-philosophical and
pseudo-scientific arguments-
the arguments against Mendelism in biology, against formalism in the arts, against objectivity in history and philosophy-all "these are the post
hoc rationalizations produced
under pressure of the need to
fit this elementary and pathetic jingoism somehow, and
at any cost, into the Marxist
framework. Because the Marxist-Leninist theory is still the
only orthodoxy that can hold
this newly awakened mass together and provide it with the
drive to carry on. But it cannot be fitted into the framework; and the rationalizations,
instead of improving matters,
finish up in absurdity.

MEANWHILE, the new
jingoism, the new Soviet patriotism, unavoidably condition
the whole approach of the
Kremlin to the outside world
in general and to the world
revolution in particular. The
Kremlin leaders cannot, however hard they may try, dissociate themselves entirely from
their own creation, the new Soviet Imperium based on the rebirth of the Russian people.
Even if they still tell themselves that this whole national resurgence which they have
BO carefully fostered is directed exclusively to making the
Soviet Union strong for one
purpose only-to act as the inviolable citadel of the Revolution until there is no longer
any need for Soviet patriotism
and Moscow can take its place
as one city among others in
the comity of universal communism-even if they tell
themselves this, which is highly improbable, their old immemorial Russian instincts are
aroused and cannot again be.
put to sleep. Those instincts
are the ones which tell them
that in spite of her backwardness, in spite of the easy superiority of the West in so
many spheres of living, Russia
for centuries has cherished an
inner light which will one day
blaze up and dazzle the whole
world. Such a conviction has
no place in Marxist-Leninism.
But we need not look so far
for our proof that even today,
when; to the superficial eye,
the drive toward world revolution seems to be in full swing
and when country after country has fallen to communism,
Soviet security still comes
first.

THE extreme contemporary
example of the conflict be
tween the short-term and the
long-term demands of the Revolution (or what may at this
stage be more accurately defined as the conflict between
the demands of the U.S.S.R. as
a power and the demands of
the world revolution), is surely the Tito affair, which shows
conclusively that the Kremlin
is still less interested in the
spread of communism than in
the spread of Russian influence. The single-minded champion of Marxist Leninism
should rejoice in the triumph
of communism in Yugoslavia.
Stalin and his friends do not
so rejoice; they do not rejoice
because they are not interested in the spread of communism as such; they are interested only in setting up governments which will obey their
orders, thus strengthening the
Soviet Union, and in using
their more far-flung disciples
to create confusion in the
ranks of the enemy. In Yugoalavia they have failed; and
the use of Russian force
against Tito would precipitate
the precise state of affairs
which the Kremlin has sought
to avoid by installing puppet
Communist governments.

THERE remains the last
paradox: the furious insistence
of the Soviet propagandists,
the propagandists of the champion of the international working class, on national sovereignty-while with all its actions the Soviet Union violates
the sovereignty of others. But
this, in the light of what we
have already seen, should be a
paradox no longer. Theoretically, in so far as the governments of the satellites may be
identified with the proletariat
of the satellites, their individual will in all large matters of
policy is subordinated to their
collective will as members of
the Cominform. At the same
time, in all domestic cultural
matters, the apologists may
argue, the Bolsheviks have always not only respected but
also positively fostered national idiosyncrasies.
And this, they will say, is
what happens for all the Cominform countries. The Cominform is no more than & clearing house for ideas. All good
Marxist governments in voluntary consultation with one another will inevitably arrive at
identical conclusions as to
policy. Any so-called Marxist
government which does not
cannot be Marxist at all.
Further, if in practice the
voice of the Soviet representative commands more respect
than any other, what could be
more natural? For the Government of the U.S.S.R. can
claim, to put it mildly, rather
more experience in the interpretation and application of
Marxist principles than any
other. This is the sophistry
that rots.
World revolution in, as it
were, the abstract--world revolution as Lenin and Trotsky
saw it-was the supreme end
in itself to which all things
were subordinated, including
the power of Moscow. That
end pursued today with absolute single-mindedness could
create great havoc in the universal status quo. If, after the
last war, the Russians had
been able to subordinate their
national pride to the Communist cause as such, they could
have advanced that cause most
effectively and carried it to
the point where it would have
shown itself as the invulnerable bulwark of their nationhood. They have not done this,
and they could not have done
it. I have tried to show why,
and why it seems to me that,
far from being a threat, the
new Soviet nationalism is an
easement for the West.

BECAUSE Soviet security
has become an end in itself instead of a means to an end;
because the states of eastern
Europe are seen first as part
of a security belt for the Soviet Union as a power and
only second as converts to the
revolutionary process; because
of a thousand other contradictions in the Soviet treatment
of Communists everywhere;
because, above all, of the specific definition of Marxist
orthodoxy as loyalty to the Soviet Union-because of all this,
the strength and integrity of
the
Communist
drive
sapped.
The patriotic nationalism
which Stalin invoked in order
to turn the Soviet Union into
an impregnable base for the
world revolution 'has got out
of hand and is killing the very
spirit of revolution. But it
was this very spirit to which
the new Russia owes its whole
existence and which still, in
spite of all distortions, provides a great part of its drive.
It that is not a fatal contradiction I do not know what is.









