Control of Atomic Energy

I DO NOT REMEMBER just when it was that President Roosevelt
told me about the atomic bomb. I do remember that it was a hot summer
afternoon and the two of us were sitting alone in his oval office discussing
certain phases of the war mobilization program. Suddenly, and for no
apparent reason, he began to tell me the awesome story of the Manhattan
Project.
I confess I thought the story fantastic. I was sure the President
was exaggerating the possibilities just to watch my amazed reaction. I
didn’t disappoint him. And, as he noted my amazement, he proceeded
with obvious pleasure to astound me with the scientists’ prediction of
what atomic energy would do. He told me that, prior to 1939, the Germans
had made some progress with their experiments and he knew they
were continuing their efforts. It was a race between us, he said, to see
who could develop the first bomb.
At that time, which I believe was the summer of 1943, the President
thought the Germans were ahead of us in the atomic race. It was evident
that the information on which he based his belief contained more speculation
than fact. Our Intelligence agents necessarily were restricted in securing
accurate information on such a highly technical matter. From
what we learned after the war, it was clear that the President had overestimated
the progress of the Germans in this respect. Nevertheless, such
reports served to stimulate the extraordinary efforts put forth on the
Manhattan Project.
After the first discussion, neither the President nor I mentioned the
atomic project to each other for many months. In fact, no one ever talked
about it unless it was absolutely necessary. I remember once mentioning
it to Secretary of War Stimson who, from its very inception, personally
supervised the Manhattan Project. His reaction indicated surprise
that I knew about it.
Even if the President had not told me about the project, as Director of
War Mobilization I could not have avoided noting certain aspects of an
enterprise as colossal as this. It, of course, held a top priority both for
men and materiel. With manpower one of our most critical shortages, a
project that at its peak claimed the labor of 125,000 men could not escape
my notice, particularly since so many of the workers were highly skilled
technicians.
However, I was not directly concerned with the project and was too
busy to be curious. Thus it was not until December 1944, when another
aspect of the labor situation brought me into the picture, that I learned
definitely of the great progress we had been making.
An effort was being made to organize the workers at the Oak Ridge
plant; controversies over the jurisdiction of the labor organizations involved
had arisen and these had been referred to the National Labor Relations
Board. The public hearing required under the circumstances had
been postponed four times at the War Department’s request; no further
postponement was possible.
Under Secretary of War Robert Patterson and Major General Leslie
R. Groves came over to the White House to discuss the problem with me.
General Groves pointed out that the hearing would require the presentation
of evidence on such things as the number of workers employed, the
number to be employed, the relationship of a particular unit to the project
as a whole, and so on. Such evidence, General Groves was convinced,
would necessitate disclosures that would seriously jeopardize the security
of the project. They thought it would be helpful if I would arrange a meeting
at the White House for the three of us and the leaders of the labor
organizations involved. I agreed.
During our discussions, Mr. Patterson said that the War Department
would know by April 1, 1945, whether or not they could develop the
bomb. Both he and General Groves thought the effort would succeed, and
they were confident they would know one way or the other by that date.
It was the first time I had heard anyone venture to name a date.
The conference was arranged for the morning of December 5. The
union officials were Mr. Joseph P. Clark of the International Brotherhood
of Firemen and Oilers and Mr. Al Wegener of the International Brotherhood
of Electrical Workers.
We took these men into our confidence. We told them that few people
knew about the project. At that time, I believe, only four members of
Congress had been given any concrete, information. We asked the labor
officials to waive their rights under the Wagner Act and to co-operate with
General Groves in protecting the security of the project. They were good
and patriotic men. They agreed to help and left immediately to do so. They
were given authority to explain the situation to the presidents of their respective
unions, Mr. John F. McNamara and Mr. Edward J. Brown;
both of these leaders likewise promised their full co-operation. Their
promise involved sacrificing rights given them by the law, but they kept
it. They convinced the local union leaders, and the secret was protected
for the duration of the war.
As a matter of fact, it was always amazing to me that the project did
not become more generally known. It also was surprising that the Congress
was willing to appropriate approximately two billion dollars without
demanding more information on the use to which it was being put.
It is a great tribute to those few congressional leaders who did have some
idea of the nature of the project that they resisted the temptation to tell
their colleagues and thus share the great responsibility.
The April i deadline came, but the result of the gigantic effort still was
in doubt. Secretary Stimson, however, was confident of success. He instilled
his confidence in the President. I am glad he did. But I have always
regretted that President Roosevelt died without knowing definitely that
the project was a success: It had been undertaken and carried to a conclusion
solely because of his vision and courage in the days when the effort
seemed hopeless.
Shortly after President Roosevelt’s death, Secretary Stimson told
President Truman that the scientists and others who had been working
under his direction felt confident they would produce an atomic bomb
within a very short time. He suggested the appointment of an Interim
Committee to consider and make recommendations to the President on
such important questions of policy as the test of the bomb, its use in the
war, and the postwar use of atomic energy.
President Truman approved Mr. Stimson’s suggestion and asked him
to serve as chairman. The President requested me to act as his representative
on the committee. The committee also included Under Secretary
of the Navy Ralph Bard; Assistant Secretary of State William L. Clayton
; Dr. Vannevar Bush, Director of the Office of Scientific Research
and Development; Dr. James B. Conant, President of Harvard University
; Dr. Karl T. Compton, President of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; and Mr. George L. Harrison, president of the New York
Life Insurance Company and special consultant to Secretary Stimson.
Mr. Harrison served as chairman in Secretary Stimson’s absence. We
were assisted in our work by a group of scientists who had been connected
with the project. They were Dr. Arthur H. Compton, Dr. Enrico Fermi,
Dr. E. O. Lawrence, and Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer.
During May and June 1945, while the attention of the country was
focused on the end of the European war and on the San Francisco Conference,
this group worked quietly and intensively in Washington. It was
an interesting?and exciting?task. Some of the newspaper correspondents
noted my presence in Washington when I was supposed to be resting
in South Carolina, and were curious about my activities. Of course, I
couldn’t tell them, so they resorted to speculation. Most of them speculated
that I was there in connection with some appointment in the government
service.
During that period I made several trips to the Naval Hospital at
Bethesda, Maryland, to talk with former Secretary Hull and get the benefit
of his advice about the work of the Department of State, which I was
to take charge of in a few weeks. On one of these trips two young sailors
showed me how unimportant was my war service.
They were hitchhiking, but were not making much progress. One, in
fact, was leaning against a post, slightly intoxicated. I thought he needed
a ride. They got in the front seat with me. The boy who sat next to me was
very alert. I got the impression that he wished to divert my attention from
his friend and, therefore, was doing a lot of talking. Finally he asked me
what my business was. I told him I did not have a business; that I was out
of a job. He sympathized with me and then asked -what had I done. Thinking
to impress him, I said I had been Director of War Mobilization. His
expression clearly showed he had never heard of it. After being quiet for
a second or two, he made another effort to satisfy his curiosity and asked:
“Well, what did you do before that?”
“I was Economic Stabilizer,” I said. I saw he had never heard of that
one either.
“I mean before the war,” he replied.
“I was a Justice of the Supreme Court,” I told him. This time he was
impressed, and asked: “You mean the High Court?”
“Yes,” I said.
He nudged the redheaded boy next to him: “How would you like to be
a member of the Highest Court?”
The young sailor replied: “I wouldn’t like it. No chance for promotion.”
In the first meeting of the Interim Committee, Doctors Bush, Conant
and Compton described the destructive power of the bomb. After hearing
them, I was confident that, when developed, it would bring a speedy end
to the war in the Pacific. I remembered that as a member of the Senate
committee handling naval appropriations I had often heard naval officers
say that a new defensive weapon was developed for every offensive
weapon. I asked the scientists what defense there could be against the
atomic bomb. But these distinguished gentlemen, who had directed the
advisory work on the bomb, could think of no defense. They did anticipate
the development of still larger and more destructive bombs. I asked
them if I should believe the only defense against further development was
to kill off all the scientists. This suggestion did not appeal to them.
After listening to the scientists discuss the development of the project,
we spent a day with the industrialists and engineers who had performed
the amazing task of constructing the huge plants in Tennessee and Washington, and of installing the manufacturing processes that produced the
bomb. Because it was a vital point in any decision on a system of control,
I asked both groups how long it might take other governments to
produce atomic bombs. The question, of course, was not only one of
physics, but one of materials, of engineering skills, of technical know-how,
and many other factors. From all the information we received, I concluded
that any other government would need from seven to ten years, at least,
to produce a bomb. And I think that to accomplish the task at such speed
would require a quicker return to normal conditions than has taken place
in any country within the last few years.
On July 1, 1945, the Interim Committee unanimously recommended to
the President that the bomb be used against Japan as soon as possible. It
added that the bomb should be used only where war plants or military
installations were located. With the exception of Mr. Bard, the committee
recommended that it be used without warning. This last question
we had carefully considered.
We feared that, if the Japanese were told that the bomb would be used
on a given locality, they might bring our boys who were prisoners of war
to that area. Also, the experts had warned us that the static test which was
to take place in New Mexico, even if successful, would not be conclusive
proof that a bomb would explode when dropped from an airplane. If we
were to warn the Japanese of the new highly destructive weapon in the
hope of impressing them and if the bomb then failed to explode, certainly
we would have given aid and comfort to the Japanese militarists. Thereafter,
the Japanese people probably would not be impressed by any statement
we might make in the hope of inducing them to surrender.
Arrangements for the test in New Mexico also were a problem for the
committee. Because no one could be sure what the full results of the first
atomic explosion might be, arrangements had to be made to evacuate the
whole area if necessary. We knew that under the best circumstances the
explosion would reverberate so far that secrecy would be difficult to maintain.
News releases, with stories to meet every foreseeable contingency,
were prepared and were to be issued to the public only if the circumstances
required.
As the President’s representative on the committee, it was my duty to
report to him the reasons for our various recommendations. Throughout
our deliberations, I told him, we relied on the estimates of the military
situation presented by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Their plans called for an
invasion of Kyushu, the southernmost island of the Japanese homeland,
on November 1. This was to be followed by an invasion of the main island
of Honshu in the spring of 1946. The Joint Chiefs anticipated that more
than five million of our armed forces would be engaged. The Japanese
armies were then estimated at about five million?an estimate we later
found was quite accurate. Secretary Forrestal had told me that the Japanese
air force suicide attacks were increasing our losses in ships and in
human lives. These attacks gained in intensity the closer we got to Japan;
it was certain that an invasion force would be attacked with far greater
fury and recklessness. The military experts informed us that, from the
facts at their disposal, they believed our invasion would cost us a million
casualties, to say nothing of those of our Allies and of the enemy.
I reported these conclusions to the President. I also told him what the
scientists, engineers and industrialists, who had come before the committee,
had to say. He expressed the opinion that, regrettable as it might
be, so far as he could see, the only reasonable conclusion was to use the
bomb.
While we were aboard the Augusta en route to Potsdam, the final
preparations were under way in New Mexico for the crucial test. The day
the greatest blast the world had yet known was reverberating over the
sands of Alamagordo, the President, Admiral Leahy and I were looking
at the rubble that had been Berlin. Reports of the test, which had to be
transmitted in top secret codes, did not reach us for several days. By that
time, the conference was in full swing; I was so busy that I have never
been able to recall the time and circumstances under which Secretary Stimson
brought us the news. Another reason the moment made so little impression
on me was that my work on the Interim Committee had already
convinced me that the bomb would succeed. News of the test seemed simply
a confirmation of a well-known fact.
Prime Minister Churchill, whose co-operation with President Roosevelt
had contributed so much to the success of the great gamble, was intensely
interested in the reports. He discussed the project at length with
President Truman and was eager to hear from me about the work of the
Interim Committee. In addition to his tremendous interest in the effect of
the bomb on the war with Japan, he foresaw more clearly than many
others the possibilities presented by the release of atomic energy.
We faced a terrible decision. We could not rely on Japan’s inquiries to
the Soviet Union about a negotiated peace as proof that Japan would surrender
unconditionally without the use of the bomb. In fact, Stalin stated
the last message to him had said that Japan would “fight to the death
rather than accept unconditional surrender.” Under those circumstances,
agreement to negotiate could only arouse false hopes. Instead, we relied
upon the Potsdam Declaration.
As soon as we had studied all the reports from New Mexico, the President
and I concluded we should tell Generalissimo Stalin that we had developed
the bomb and proposed to use it unless Japan acceded promptly
to our demand for surrender. The Soviet Government was not at war with
Japan, but we had been informed of their intention to enter the war and
felt, therefore, that Stalin should know.
At the close of the meeting of the Big Three on the afternoon of July 24,
the President walked around the large circular table to talk to Stalin. After
a brief conversation the President rejoined me and we rode back to the
“Little White House” together. He said he had told Stalin that, after long
experimentation, we had developed a new bomb far more destructive than
any other known bomb, and that we planned to use it very soon unless
Japan surrendered. Stalin’s only reply was to say that he was glad to hear
of the bomb and he hoped we would use it. I was surprised at Stalin’s lack
of interest. I concluded that he had not grasped the importance of the discovery.
I thought that the following day he would ask for more information
about it. He did not. Later I concluded that, because the Russians kept
secret their developments in military weapons, they thought it improper
to ask us about ours.
Two nights after the talk with Stalin, the Potsdam Declaration was
issued. We devoutly hoped that the Japanese would heed our warning that,
unless they surrendered unconditionally, the destruction of their armed
forces and the devastation of their homeland was inevitable. But, on July
28, the Japanese Premier issued a statement saying the declaration was
unworthy of notice. That was disheartening. There was nothing left to
do but use the bomb. Secretary Stimson had selected targets of military
importance and President Truman approved his plans. Shortly thereafter
Secretary Stimson left for the United States.
Despite the Japanese Premier’s statement, I continued to hope the
Japanese Government would change its mind. I was greatly disappointed
when August 2, the day of our departure from Potsdam, arrived and no
further word had been received. I recognized then that our hope of avoiding
use of the bomb was virtually gone.
The President had accepted an invitation from King George for a brief
visit at Plymouth Harbor, where we were to meet the USS Augusta for
the trip home. Because the law of succession placed the Secretary of State
next in line for the presidency in case of the death or resignation of the
President, President Truman and I traveled from Potsdam to Plymouth
on separate planes. We landed at Harrowbeer, near Plymouth. Shortly
thereafter Admiral Leahy and I accompanied the President aboard the
battleship H. M. S. Renown, where King George entertained us at
luncheon.
The King had learned from Churchill of the successful experiment with
the bomb and was eager to know all about it. Most of our luncheon conversation
was devoted to the bomb. The only one of the group who was
skeptical about its success was Admiral Leahy and the King enjoyed joking
with him about his pessimism. Admiral Leahy felt that the scientists
greatly exaggerated the bomb’s capacity to damage. Throughout the entire
discussion, King George showed that, contrary to the impression of
some Americans, he was well informed on the diplomatic as well as the
military situation. His views on pending problems, in my opinion, were
sound. Later in the afternoon, the King paid a return visit to the Augusta;
when he departed, the Augusta started for home.
On August 6, the President and I had lunch with the enlisted men. A
few minutes before twelve, Captain Frank H. Graham, the watch officer
of the White House Map Room, hurried into the mess hall and handed
the President a brief message from the Navy Department saying that
Hiroshima had been bombed a few hours before. Ten minutes later Captain
Graham was back with a second message, this time from Secretary
Stimson. His report indicated that the results of the bomb were even
more successful than the test had led us to expect. The President read the
message aloud to me, and then stood and asked the crew to listen for a
moment. He announced that he had just received two messages informing
him of the highly successful results of our first use of a terrifically
powerful new weapon with an explosive 20,000 times as powerful as TNT.
As the President left the mess hall with the two messages in his hand, the
crew clapped and cheered. He went to the wardroom, where he made the
same announcement to the ship’s officers, and again applause rang through
the ship. A few minutes later, the ship’s radio began to carry news bulletins
from Washington about the bomb and the statement about its development,
which the President had approved just before leaving Germany.
I thought that the bombing of Hiroshima, southern headquarters and
depot for the homeland army, would convince the Japanese that the Allied
nations meant what they said in the Potsdam Declaration. Millions of
leaflets were dropped warning the Japanese that one out of ten listed cities
would be the next target. We received no communication from them and
so, on August 8, the second bomb was dropped on Nagasaki, a major seaport
with many war plants.
As at Hiroshima, the destruction in Nagasaki was terrific. The Emperor
did not wait for further evidence of our intention to carry out the
Potsdam Declaration. He broke the deadlock that had existed for several
days in the Japanese Cabinet; on August 10, he submitted the offer of surrender.
No one should doubt that the destruction wrought by the atomic
bomb influenced the action of the Emperor and the Cabinet.
Those two bombs were all we then had ready for use, but others were
on the way and some were expected to be even more powerful. In these
two raids there were many casualties but not nearly so many as there
would have been had our air force continued to drop incendiary bombs on
Japan’s cities. Certainly, by bringing the war to an end, the atomic bomb
saved the lives of thousands of American boys.
No one who played a part in the development of the bomb or in our decision
to use it felt happy about it. It was natural and right that men should
worry about performing a duty that would cost so many human lives. Most
of these men were civilians, but I have no doubt that all thinking men in
the armed forces felt the same way about air raids, the dropping of incendiary
bombs and similar actions which cost many lives. Being soldiers,
they did not write to the press about their views as did the civilians. But
the truth is, war remains what General Sherman said it was.
Shortly after Japan’s surrender, many people demanded that we
immediately give the world all the scientific and engineering information
on the atomic bomb that we possessed. Most thinking people wanted international
control of atomic energy. Some, however, were not so particular
about safeguards necessary to protect us against a violator of the
international agreement. I agreed with the scientists who argued that inevitably
some other nation would produce an atomic bomb, but I felt that
we should not shorten that period unless we were fully protected. I felt
that if any nation were opposed to submitting atomic energy to complete
control by an international organization, with safeguards against violations,
then the longer we could keep the bomb out of the hands of that nation,
the better it would be for the people of the world. I still feel that way.
On November 10, 1945, Prime Minister Attlee and Prime Minister
Mackenzie King came to Washington to talk with the President about
our future atomic energy policy. The day of their arrival President Truman
invited his guests to accompany him on Sunday on a cruise down the
Potomac aboard the presidential yacht, the Williamsburg. The party also
included Lord Halifax, Sir John Anderson, Admiral Leahy and myself.
That afternoon conversations began. They continued that night and for
several days. On November 15, the President, Mr. Attlee and Mr. Mackenzie
King held a press conference. They announced that the three governments
agreed on the need for international action, under the auspices of
the United Nations, to provide controls over atomic energy to insure its
use only for peaceful purposes, to outlaw atomic weapons and other major
weapons capable of mass destruction, and to provide for effective safeguards
through inspection.
History will not disclose action by any governments comparable to this
generous offer. It was only as a result of great expenditures that we, in
co-operation with our Allies, the United Kingdom and Canada, developed
a weapon so destructive as to frighten all thinking people. We could have
held this weapon and used it as a threat to force concessions from other
governments. Instead, the three governments hastened to offer the secret
of this power to an international organization in order to have it used for
peaceful rather than for destructive purposes.
I was scheduled to give a speech the following day at Charleston, South
Carolina, on international trade. With the announcement of this historic
agreement I rewrote the first half of the speech. I did not want to neglect
a single opportunity to stress to our people the importance of controlling
atomic energy “so that it may be used, not for war and destruction, but for
the peace and happiness of the world?’
In meeting the challenge of atomic energy, I said, we must “let our
minds be bold.” At the same time, I cautioned, “we must not imagine wishfully
that overnight there can arise full grown a world government wise
and strong enough to protect all of us, and tolerant and democratic enough
to command our willing loyalty.
“If we are to preserve the continuity of civilized life, we must work with
the materials at hand, improving and adding to existing institutions until
they can meet the stem test of our time.”
I described the plan announced in Washington the day before and said
we realized that it was “a very modest first step in what is certain to be a
long and difficult journey.” I emphasized that even though we had advanced
a program, “the creation and development of safeguards to protect
us all from unspeakable destruction is . . . the responsibility of all
governments.”
“Without the united effort and unremitting co-operation of all the nations
of the world,” I said, “there will be no enduring and effective protection
against the atomic bomb.”
A month later, when Mr. Bevin and I went to Moscow, we took with
us a very definite proposal based on the Washington agreement of November
15. It called for the establishment by the United Nations of a
Commission on Atomic Energy and all weapons capable of mass destruction.
I proposed that we place the atomic energy resolution at the top of the
agenda. Mr. Molotov objected and asked that it be placed at the end. I
agreed, although I wondered why he took such a position. At first, I
thought it might be because one of Russia’s most distinguished scientists,
reportedly an expert on nuclear physics, was reported by the press to be
in Paris. I assumed Molotov wished to have him present for the discussions
and therefore had suggested deferring the item. This theory was
upset, however, when the scientist returned to Moscow and still did not
attend the conference. I then came to the conclusion that Molotov’s request
had been made solely to give us the impression that the Soviet Government
did not regard the atomic energy problem as important.
At Moscow, as at Potsdam and then at the Council of Foreign Ministers
meeting in London, no member of the Soviet delegation expressed any
curiosity about atomic energy. At Potsdam, neither Stalin nor Molotov
had mentioned the matter after the President’s talk with the Generalissimo.
At London, Mr. Molotov showed no interest whatever; his only
references to the bomb were a few offhand remarks about my carrying an
atomic bomb in my pocket. I decided that I was right in the conclusion I
had come to at Potsdam, that the Russians never disclose information
about such a discovery to anyone else and so thought it would be improper
for them to exhibit curiosity about ours.
Postponement of the atomic energy issue, however, meant considerable
inconvenience for Dr. James B. Conant, president of Harvard University,
who had generously agreed to accompany me to Moscow in an advisory
capacity. He had done so expecting that, as soon as the atomic energy
resolution was adopted, he could return home to the urgent business that
was awaiting him. Instead, he had to sit through about ten days of discussion
on totally unrelated issues.
Conant sat near me during most of the meetings. After being a silent
observer for nearly a week, he leaned over to me one day and said:
“I think the President of every university in the United States should
be forced to attend a conference of the Council of Foreign Ministers. They
might then appreciate the patience required to reach agreement with our
Soviet friends.”
I felt like accusing him of harboring some secret animosity toward his
fellow university presidents, but I appreciated his thought.
Dr. Conant’s presence in our delegation was noted at length in the Moscow
press. He and I fully expected that some of the Russian scientists
would call on him. They did not.
One afternoon, Mr. Molotov entertained the three delegations. He is
always a good host. In talking with Dr. Conant, Mr. Molotov remarked
that, during his visit in Moscow, the president of a great university like
Harvard should address the University of Moscow on the subject of
atomic energy. That night Dr. Conant told me about Molotov’s statement
and said he was willing to make such a speech. He thought it would be one
way to pierce the “iron curtain” and explain our views on atomic energy,
but he was not sure Molotov really meant it. The following day I mentioned
the matter to Molotov, saying that, if he were serious, Dr. Conant
would be glad to address the university. Mr. Molotov said he had not
been serious, that he had no authority to extend an invitation on behalf of
the University, and that he had been only trying to be pleasant.
When we finally reached the subject of atomic energy, Mr. Molotov
offered only a few amendments to our proposed resolution. With some
revisions, we accepted the Soviets’ suggestions. One dealt with the relationship
between the proposed Atomic Energy Commission and the Security
Council of the United Nations. As revised, the resolution provided
that, in view of the Security Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council should
issue directions to the commission in matters affecting security. It is obvious
this must be done by the Security Council, which is in continuous
session and which has the power to take action. The Assembly, on the
other hand, is not always in session, and even when meeting it can only
make recommendations.
The only paragraph of our proposal to which Mr. Molotov raised serious
objection provided: “The work of the Commission shall proceed by
separate stages, the successful completion of each of which will develop the
necessary confidence of the world before the next stage is undertaken.”
Mr. Molotov argued that this was a matter to be determined by the commission.
I told him it went to the heart of our whole proposal and that
without it we would not offer the resolution. I stated that this language
had been agreed upon by the President, Prime Minister Attlee and Prime
Minister Mackenzie King and we would have to insist upon its retention.
He withdrew his objection. As a result, the proposal that we had expected
would provoke extensive discussion was agreed to with less debate than
any other subject on the agenda.
At the Christmas Eve dinner given by Generalissimo Stalin, I told him
about Dr. Conant’s distinguished service as an educator and more particularly
as one of the contributors to the success of the atomic energy
project. Stalin was not so indifferent as Mr. Molotov had appeared to be.
He said that, although scientists spoke a language he did not clearly understand,
they did a wonderful work and he thought those American scientists
responsible for the discovery of atomic energy were to be especially congratulated.
A few minutes later, Molotov, acting as toastmaster, proposed a toast
to Dr. Conant and, in a good-humored way, expressed the hope the doctor
did not have an atom bomb in his pocket. Dr. Conant responded in like
good humor to the toast. Generalissimo Stalin, beside whom I was seated,
arose and said he was not satisfied to dismiss Dr. Conant’s work thus
lightly. He believed, he said, that Dr. Conant and his associates had rendered
a great service and he wanted to congratulate them upon their success.
During the few days between my return home from Moscow and my
departure to London for the United Nations General Assembly meeting,
I acted in anticipation of the adoption of our resolution. I appointed a conmittee
to begin work upon plans to be presented to the Atomic Energy
Commission when it was organized. The committee was composed of
Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson, as chairman, the former Assistant
Secretary of War John J. McCloy, Dr. Bush, Dr. Conant, and General
Groves.
In London, the British Government presented the resolution, drafted
at Moscow, to the General Assembly on behalf of all five permanent members
of the Security Council and Canada. On January 24, just before the
resolution was adopted without amendment by a unanimous vote, I made
a short statement to the Assembly emphasizing the common responsibility
for controlling atomic energy.
“The problems presented by the discovery of atomic energy and of
other forces capable of mass destruction cannot be solved by any one nation,”
I stressed. “They are the common responsibility of all nations and
each of us must do our part in meeting them. In meeting these problems
we must realize that in this atomic age and in this interdependent world
our common interests in preserving the peace far outweigh any possible
conflict in interest that might divide us.”
The day before the adoption of the General Assembly resolution, the
committee I had appointed in Washington appointed a board of consultants
with David E. Lilienthal as chairman. The other members were Mr.
Chester I. Barnard, president of the New Jersey Telephone Company;
Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, director of the Los Alamos atomic laboratory
; Dr. Charles Allen Thomas, vice president of the Monsanto Chemical
Company, and JXIr. Harry A. Winne, vice president of the General
Electric Company.
The so-called Acheson-Lilienthal report was the work of the committee
and its Consultants. It was adopted and released to the public on March
28, 1946. In a foreword to that report, I referred to it as a “suitable starting
point for the informed public discussion which is one of the essential
factors in developing sound policy,” and emphasized that “the document
is being made public not as a statement of policy but solely as a basis for
such discussion.”
The report succeeded in its purpose. The discussion was nation-wide
and the objectives the report set forth were received generally with approval.
The essence of the report was summed up by Undersecretary Acheson
in a radio discussion on April 23, 1946, in which he said:
“In plain words, the report sets up a plan under which no nation would
make atomic bombs or the materials for them. All dangerous activities
would be carried on?not merely inspected?by a live functioning international
authority with a real purpose in the world and capable of attracting
competent personnel. This monopoly of the dangerous activities would
still leave a large and tremendously productive field of safe activities open
to individual nations, their industries and universities. . . . The extremely
favored position with regard to atomic devices which the United
States enjoys at present is only temporary. It will not last. We must use
that advantage now to promote international security and to carry out our
policy of building a lasting peace through international agreement . .
For the task of translating the various proposals stimulated by the
Acheson-Lilienthal report into a workable plan, I recommended to the
President the appointment of Bernard M. Baruch. During the recent war,
as during World War I, he had rendered distinguished public service. He
had been official adviser to me when I was Director of War Mobilization,
meeting with me regularly and helping with many problems; he had been
an unofficial adviser to the President and the heads of several war agencies.
He had earned a rest from public service, but, appreciating the importance
of the assignment, he agreed to undertake the job. The President sent
his name to the Senate on March 18, 1946. The appointment was greeted
by the public with deserved acclaim, and his nomination was quickly confirmed.
The law governing our membership in the United Nations stipulates
that our representatives in the organization and on its commissions must
follow the policy determined by the President, transmitted through the
Secretary of State. Accordingly, Mr. Baruch asked for a directive giving
the American policy on atomic energy control. I asked him to help draft
the policy. After several conferences between Mr. Baruch, his associate,
Mr. John LI. Hancock, Mr. Acheson and me, we agreed upon an extensive,
eleven-page statement of policy. I submitted it to the President for
his consideration. Later, the President, Mr. Baruch and I discussed it
further and made some changes; the President then gave it to Mr. Baruch
as his directive. In doing so, he advised Mr. Baruch to exercise his own
judgment on the methods most likely to accomplish the stated objectives.
The policy of the United States, as described in that directive, was presented
to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission by Mr. Baruch
on June 14,1946. It was a noteworthy speech which began with this solemn
injunction to the commission:
“We are here to make a choice between the quick and the dead.”
The United States proposed the creation of an International Atomic
Development Authority, to which should be entrusted all phases of the
development and use of atomic energy, starting with the raw material including
:
1. Managerial control or ownership of all atomic-energy activities
potentially dangerous to world security.
2. Power to control, inspect, and license all other atomic activities.
3. The duty of fostering the beneficial uses of atomic energy.
4. Responsibility for research and development intended to put
the authority in the forefront of atomic knowledge and thus to enable
it to comprehend, and therefore to detect, misuse of atomic energy.
Mr. Baruch said that when an adequate system for control, including
the renunciation of the bomb as a weapon, was agreed upon and put into
operation and when punishment was provided for violation of the rules of
control, then the manufacture of atomic bombs should stop; existing bombs
should be disposed of pursuant to the terms of the treaty; and the authority given full information concerning the know-how for producing atomic
energy.
The policy further provided that penalties be fixed for such violations
as the following: (1) illegal possession or use of an atomic bomb or of
atomic material suitable for use in an atomic bomb; (2) the seizing of
any plant or other property belonging to or licensed by the authority.
Mr. Baruch drafted a group of men of unusual ability, including Mr.
Hancock, whose services during the two world wars have been invaluable
; Ferdinand Eberstadt, former Vice Chairman of the War Production
Board ; Herbert Bayard Swope, who had been an associate of Mr.
Baruch in the War Industries Board in World War I; Fred Searls, Jr.,
who had served with me as special assistant in the Office of War Mobilization
and also in the Department of State. He also called on Mr. Thomas F.
Farrell and Dr. Richard C. Tolman, to assist him in representing the
United States.
From the beginning, he insisted the plan should provide that, once the
treaty was ratified, any government violating its treaty obligation and developing
or using atomic energy for destructive purposes should be subjected
to swift and sure punishment; and in case of violation no one of the
permanent members of the Security Council should be permitted to veto
punitive action by the council. Our position was that the permanent members
of the council should in this special situation agree in advance to waive
the veto power.
The public was kept fully informed of everything that took place in the
Atomic Energy Commission from June until November. When the
Council of Foreign Ministers met in New York, Mr. Baruch and his
associates conferred with me about the advisability of asking the Atomic
Energy Commission to vote immediately on the principles of the United
States proposal.
These gentlemen had been studying the problem for six months and
were certain the United States proposal was generally acceptable to every
member of the commission except the representatives of the Soviet
Union and Poland. Their description of the tactics of the Soviet representative,
Mr. Gromyko, was simply a restatement of the delaying tactics
I had encountered on other questions in the Council of Foreign Ministers
for over a year. They called my attention to the fact that the terms of two
members of the commission would expire on December 31; if no action
was taken by that date, in January Mr. Gromyko probably would move
to postpone further action on the ground that the two new members
should have time to study the problem. I knew they were right and agreed
that they should act at once.
On December 5, Mr. Baruch presented his plea for immediate action
to the commission and proposed a series of general findings and recommendations which encompassed the American plan. He pointed out that
the commission and its committees had held over seventy meetings and
were qualified to take this step. The commission, with the Soviet Union
and Poland abstaining, agreed to act. Subsequently, on December 30, it
voted to submit its first report to the Security Council with a recommendation
that a comprehensive international system of control and inspection
be established and its functions be defined by a treaty in which all the
United Nations should be entitled to participate. Again, the vote was 10
to 0, with the Soviet Union and Poland abstaining.
The report recommended the establishment of an international agency
to promote among all nations the exchange of scientific information on
atomic energy for peaceful ends; prevent the use of atomic energy for
destructive purposes; and to exercise the controls necessary to insure its
use only for peaceful purposes. It could carry out research and developmental
responsibilities in order to remain first in atomic knowledge and
would have the exclusive right to carry on atomic research for destructive
purposes.
Representatives of the agency would be afforded unimpeded rights of
ingress, egress and access for their inspections and other duties into, from
and within the territory of every participating nation. The agency should
have the right to prohibit the manufacture, possession and use of atomic
weapons, provide for the disposal of any existing stocks of atomic weapons
and insure the proper use of nuclear fuels adaptable for use in weapons.
The commission stated that the treaty should specify how to determine
violations of its terms and should define the violations which would constitute
international crimes. It also should establish how to enforce its
measures and how to punish violators. Serious violations, it proposed,
should be reported immediately to the nations that signed the treaty, the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
The commission supported our contention that once the violations had
been defined and the methods of enforcement and punishment agreed to,
a violator should have no legal protection by veto or otherwise, from the
consequences of his act. The report also stated that a violation might be
of so grave a character that the inherent right of self-defense, recognized
in article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, might be exercised.
Finally, the report provided that the treaty should embrace the entire
program for putting the international system of control and inspection
into effect and should provide a step-by-step schedule for the completion
of the process. The commission would determine when any particular
stage or stages had been completed and subsequent ones were to begin.
While Mr. Baruch was pressing for action on atomic energy, Mr.
Molotov presented to the General Assembly of the United Nations a
proposal for general disarmament. I did not take it seriously. What the
Soviet delegation really sought was to combine the Atomic Energy Commission
with a commission on general disarmament.
The record since January 1946 shows what would happen if this effort
had succeeded. The Security Council has been unable to agree upon the
relatively simple question of establishing military contingents to enforce
the decisions of the United Nations. It is therefore easy to guess how
long it would take a commission to agree on a general disarmament program,
including the reduction of naval, air and land armaments?several
years certainly. Therefore, if the two commissions were combined, there
would be many more excuses for delaying an agreement on atomic energy
control.
Despite the clear and obvious necessity for the control of atomic energy,
and despite the existence of a plan which has won approval everywhere
except with the Soviet Union and its satellites, agreement still seems remote.
If we cannot agree upon the control of this one major weapon, we
certainly cannot agree upon the limitation of all armaments. The Soviet
Union does not take into consideration the fact that the United States
proposals, as presented by Mr. Baruch, offer a pattern for control of
more than atomic weapons. The resolution creating the Atomic Energy
Commission specifically authorized it to investigate how to control other
weapons of mass destruction. The pattern developed for atomic energy
could be applied to these other weapons, such as bacteriological warfare.
That pattern could mark the beginning of general and genuine disarmament,
but the Soviet Union chose to ignore what could have been and
what still could be a fruitful possibility.
The Soviet tactic was exceedingly smart. The word “disarmament” is
very attractive to a war-weary world. But disarmament, to be effective,
must look to the future. It is easy to see now what folly it would have
been, when gunpowder was discovered, to start disarming by limiting
the use of the bow and arrow. But that is what the Soviet Union, in effect,
proposed.
The General Assembly insisted that the work of the Commission for
the Control of Conventional Armaments be kept distinct from that of
the Atomic Energy Commission. Nevertheless, the Soviet Union’s representatives
have continued their efforts to merge the two.
I think I know their motives.
Through such a merger of issues they want to get away from the Atomic
Energy Resolution, to which they agreed at Moscow and which was
adopted by the United Nations. That resolution provides for safeguards
and adequate inspection. It provides that the work should proceed by
stages and that the commission must be convinced by inspection that one
stage of the work is proceeding satisfactorily before it begins the
next stage. This is the clause to which Mr. Molotov objected at Moscow,
but finally accepted. I think he has regretted that agreement ever since.
That section prevents a full exchange of information until the system of inspection
and control is operating effectively. It would make it possible for
representatives of the international organization, who may be nationals
of another state, to inspect Soviet plants. This is in conflict with their
whole system, which is based upon and sustained by secrecy.
The Atomic Energy Resolution, therefore, is an agreement the Soviet
Union wants the world to forget and which it urgently desires to see
superseded.
The reason for this determined resistance to effective control is equally
clear. Mr. Gromyko disclosed it recently when he stated that the American
plan proposes that “a system of inspection be established in such a way
that it should be given unlimited powers and the possibility of interfering
with the internal economic life of nations.”
It is unfortunate but apparently true that the Soviets think capitalist
interference is more to be feared than atomic bombs. And protection of
the Soviet economic system from that interference seems to be more important
than the protection of humanity from the scourge of atomic warfare.
This fear also explains the Soviet stand on the veto as applied to
atomic energy. Mr. Gromyko has said that the Soviet Union is not willing
to subject the fate of its internal economy to a majority vote. The veto,
he contends, is necessary to protect the sovereignty of the states. The
Soviet leaders do not yet appreciate that civilization and not state sovereignty
is at stake.
No one wants to interfere in the internal economic life of their nation,
but Soviet suspicion of the outsider is so deep seated that they believe
that any inspection made by representatives of the international organization,
adequate to satisfy the rest of the world, would interfere in their
internal affairs. Every statement Mr. Gromyko has made on the subject
of disarmament and atomic energy control should be read and considered
in this light and in the light of what the Soviet Union has done in these
postwar years. One is forced to the conclusion that the United States
must not agree to any plan that will make it possible for anyone, including
the Soviet Union, to avoid effective inspection.
If the United States destroyed its bombs and agreed not to make any
more and then desired later to violate our treaty obligations and make
bombs, our alert and uncontrolled press soon would discover it and make
public the violation of our pledge. But that is not possible in the Soviet
Union. Should the Soviet Government obtain from the international organization
the scientific information and the engineering know-how and
decide to build a plant and produce bombs, no one outside the Soviet
Union would know it until the Red Army was ready to use them. That
would be too late.
I know the officials of the present Soviet Government assert that they
scrupulously carry out agreements. I hesitate to charge them with violating
agreements, but I do say they have a very peculiar way of interpreting
some of them.
What, then, shall we do in case the Soviet Union refuses to join in a
treaty containing the safeguards it accepted in principle in Moscow and
in London, and which clearly are essential to effective control? The answer
is not a happy one, but I see no other. We must pray that the Soviet
leaders will change their minds, and while we pray, we must use our best
efforts to develop better bombs and more of them. For our own protection,
we must continue pushing forward the boundaries of our scientific knowledge.
This is a harsh judgment, but the nature of the weapon demands that
we be realistic.
We have not been, and I do not believe we ever shall be, guilty of using
“atomic diplomacy.” Others might suspect us of it because that is what
they would do under similar circumstances. But, as I said in Charleston,
South Carolina, on November 16, 1945, the suggestion that we might use
the atomic bomb “as a diplomatic or military threat against any nation
is not only untrue in fact but is a wholly unwarranted reflection upon the
American Government and people.”
It is one of the inherent characteristics of our democracy that we can
fight a war only with the genuine consent of our people. No President in
the absence of a declaration of war by the Congress could authorize an
atomic bombing without running the risk of impeachment. No one who
knows the peace-loving temper of our people can believe that our Congress
would adopt a declaration of war contrary to our obligations solemnly undertaken,
under the United Nations Charter. The history of 1914 to 1917
and of 1939 to 1941 is convincing proof of the slowness of Congress to
declare war. There is surely no reason to believe that it would be more
eager to engage in a future war more terrible than any we have ever
known.
While we wait for the realities of the atomic age to penetrate the fears
and suspicions of the leaders of the Soviet Union, we must not permit
the magnitude of the United States initiative to become blurred in the
minds of men. It is a record that clearly shows we do not wish to continue
making atomic bombs.
Within one year after the successful demonstration of atomic power,
the United States had done these things:
1. Secured the agreement of our collaborators in the discovery of
atomic energy to place that discovery under international control.
2. Secured the co-operation of the five major powers in initiating
machinery to consider plans for international control.
3. Secured the unanimous adoption of that proposal by the United
Nations.
4. Devised a detailed plan for world control of nuclear energy by an
Atomic Development Authority representing all the United Nations.
5. Established by act of Congress a civilian commission to exercise
strict control over all fissionable materials.
6. Released radioactive materials (isotopes) for medical, biologic, and
scientific research.
7. Presented to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission our
detailed plan for international control of atomic energy; and, within a
few months after the end of that first year, secured approval for our plan
from all but two of the members of the commission.
I do not agree with those who predict that should the Soviet Union
continue to block that record of progress, mass destruction must follow
in a few years. In the war just ended, the Germans and Japanese had
poison gas and death-dealing germs, as did the Russians, the British and
ourselves. That war was no polite tea party. It was brutal. Nevertheless,
no nation dared use these terrible weapons because they knew the same
weapons would be used against them.
In saying this, I do not minimize the danger. It would be unfortunate
if hostile governments possessed atomic bombs. But, it would be even
more unfortunate if we threw our bombs away, gave our information to
an international organization with inadequate power to exercise effective
control, and thus enabled another government to manufacture bombs
without our knowledge far sooner than otherwise would have been possible.
The years ahead pose no greater challenge to mankind. In the time we
have at our disposal, fear and suspicion may yet yield to the wisdom of
insuring the use of atomic power for human welfare rather than for deadly
warfare.
