We Must Risk a New Policy in China
By HAROLD J. NOBLE
Are we recklessly gambling our lives and treasure by doing nothing about
the communist sweep in Asia? Is our Department of State dead wrong? Should 
we boldly take the lead in forging a Pacific Pact similar to the Atlantic Pact?

WILL MR. NOBLE¡¯S IDEA WORK?
The author, Harold J. Noble, was born in
Korea, studied in Japan, served as a United
States Marine Corps officer on Guadalcanal,
and after our occupation of Japan held an
important post on General MacArthur¡¯s intelligence staff. He is an acknowledged expert
on the subject of our policy in Asia. The solution he presents for this problem here is
almost diametrically opposed to the view advanced by Edgar Snow, associate editor of
this magazine, in The Saturday Evening
Post issue of April 9, 1949. Snow said a Communist China could and probably would remain independent of Soviet Russia. Noble
believes this is impossible and therefore advocates a Pacific Pact similar to the Atlantic
Pact our country has underwritten. The Post
is not as optimistic as Snow on Communist
China. The Post is not as optimistic as Noble
on the practicability of his plan. ìé The Editors.

FACED with the catastrophe in Asia, considered United States policy is to do nothing.
The Chinese Taoist maxim,
"By doing nothing, all things are done,¡± has merit for the
philosopher, but it is a very dangerous principle for
the guidance of statesmen. Anybody who has been
conscious since Munich must have learned that.
This article will offer the rough outline of a policy
designed to replace our planless drifting in Asia.
Any policy involves risk, but indecision, I am convinced, is a far more dangerous gamble than positive
action at this time. Inaction risks the easy communist absorption of Asia. Action risks an expensive
program to stop this. Either policy risks war. I believe that intelligent positive action makes war less
likely?and, should war come, makes victory more
likely.
Certainly, any program is dangerous, but a program for the alliance and common action of all the
free states of the world is the safest possible gamble
for the United States of America in the very unsafe
world of today. How can we arrive at such a program?
First, the United States must call for the consultation and alliance of the free nations of the Pacific
and Asia?a program boldly designed to check the
communist advance. It simply makes no sense to follow one policy in Europe and its reverse in Asia. We
are boldly ?and expensively?attempting to contain the communist tide in Europe, but we are allowing it to roll on unchecked all the way from Siberia ? 
through the countries of Eastern Asia and clear to
the shores of the Red Sea.
Recrimination over our past blunders is useless
now. We should realize, however, that a primary
factor in the collapse of Nationalist China was the
American policy aimed at forcing communists into
the Nationalist government at a time of communist
weakness. Most American officials now admit that
policy was wrong, but many of the same men who
during the last five years so strongly advocated a
communist coalition in China are today the very advisers who tell us it was always too late?that it is
far too late now, and nothing can be done.
Current United States policy rejects any responsibility for Nationalist failure. We place the whole
blame on Chinese corruption, incompetence and bad
leadership, dismissing the informed testimony of
Generals Albert C. Wedemeyer and Claire ChennauK. Our Department of State wistfully looks forward to the time when the Chinese communists
either will ¡± pull a Tito¡± in conflict with Russian imperialism or will collapse in attempting to govern
the amorphous mass of China, with its traditions of
local authoritarianism. Such thinking is strongly influenced by those apologists for the Chinese communists who insist that the Russians gave them no
assistance of any kind. For this reason, they say, the
Chinese communists are no menace to us. The elaborate and extensive assistance and the close ties between the Russian and Chinese communist parties
and governments are so well established that I feel I
need not waste space disproving such claims. The
first to deny them are the Chinese communists themselves, who ought to know if anybody does.
Official American thinking is that while we wait
for the dust to settle, for inevitable Sino-Russian
conflict and for the communist collapse from lack of
administrative competence in the midst of the corruptive fleshpots of China¡¯s great cities, we should
do nothing to antagonize the communists. Then
they'll turn to us for technical advice and capital,
which will further seduce them and strengthen them
for that ultimate conflict with the Russians.
This type of reasoning seems irresponsible. Any
policy which assumes that Chinese communism is
benign, while Polish or some other European communism is a menace, is unrealistic. What makes
American or Russian or French or Czech communists our enemies, while Japanese or Korean or Chinese communists are our friends? By their own
claims and the evidence of their own conduct, the
Chinese communists, like all other national communists, are struggling to establish the ¡°dictatorship of the proletariat¡± ? that is, to establish a communist dictatorship on the Russian model. Such a
form of society is not more admirable nor less dangerous to the free nations because it is Chinese instead of Russian. Regardless of whether the Russians
dominate the Chinese communists, or whether the
U.S.S.R. and the Chinese S.S.R. are allies, or
whether the Chinese Soviet state attempts on its
own to establish a Communist Federation of Asia,
Chinese communism is a menace to a free Asia.
Perhaps in fifty or a hundred years, nationalist
separatism would become so strong on its own momentum that the great communist conspiracy would
fail. But the makers of American policy must consider next year and five years from now. It is dangerous to gamble our national security on the hope
that, from its internal weakness alone, the Euro-Asiatic communist menace will shortly evaporate.
If the communists do succeed in organizing China,
and then spread their controls to other parts of Asia,
either directly or through alliances, our danger
would be far more critical than when we faced a
Japanese Empire having the same geographical ambitions. Even now we are so frightened of possible
war with Russia that annually we spend billions of
our savings on arms which we would much rather
spend on peaceful living. If the Chinese communists take over the great Chinese nation this year
and we do nothing to block them, then, if, after five
or ten years, we find ourselves at war with Russia,
what role would Asia play? On our side? Could any
reasonable man expect the Chinese communists to
stand aloof? Could he expect them not to take advantage of that war to attempt to overthrow the
free governments of the Philippines, India or
Pakistan? Or that in alliance with Russia they
would not bend every sinew to destroy us too?
Their success, of course, would depend on whether
they could establish a rigid dictatorship and reorganize the Chinese economy under that dictatorship. Those who say they can¡¯t are unwise. How
many men foresaw, in November, 1917, how well
Lenin and his small band of Bolsheviks would succeed in clamping a successful and lasting militant
dictatorship over the vast lands and enormous
millions of Russia? How many years passed before
experts quit assuring us that the Bolshevik collapse
was just around the corner? Maybe the Chinese
communists can't do it?maybe. But statesmen
who today are willing to gamble our national life
itself on that "maybe¡± seem hardly worth our
complete confidence.
We can be sure that nothing the United States
can do, no matter how sweet, could make the communists like and trust us. We can give them all the
credits and machines and technical advice we possess, and they will still distrust and hate us as a
nation. They are fanatical communists, including
non-MOSCOW-visiting
Mao Tse-tung, who believe as a profound article of faith that, being the
world¡¯s greatest capitalist nation, the
United States is a vicious imperialist
state which must and will be destroyed.
Mao Tse-tung makes no bones about
this. He will accept our assistance in
the same spirit that Lenin accepted
American capitalist assistance, and
that more recently Stalin accepted
Lend-Lease. That will not be in the
spirit of brotherhood, if history is any
guide.
What does the United States want
in Asia? We want a peaceful community of free, friendly, nonexpanding nationalist states. We prefer democratic
states, but our test should be whether
the government concerned is determined to maintain its own independence, whether it is friendly toward us
and whether it is willing to co-operate
with other Asiatic states with similar
views on foreign affairs. Fortunately,
these aspirations are not peculiar to us,
for they are common to all the free
peoples of Asia. We want no special
privilege in Asia, and therefore can
proffer friendship and alliance to
Asiatic governments with clean hands.
The most that we ask is the maximum
opportunity for trade on a purely competitive basis. If this is selfish, it is the
selfishness of all. It is no accident that
the great trading nations also have the
highest living standards in the world.
As the most powerful of the free
Pacific powers, the United States has
problems of great responsibility which
go with power. Our commitments in
Europe and at home, however, are so
great that there is danger of overstraining our economy. Since economic collapse would be almost as dangerous to
us as foreign invasion, while inevitably
it would take our allies down with us,
we must exercise our responsibilities to
the extent that we economically can.
Our first requisite is allies?states
which, recognizing the common menace of communist expansion, will agree
to common action to contain it. Our
potential allies in Asia are many, although their present strength is not
comparable to that of our allies in
Europe. Through common action,
however, they would become stronger.
There is no free government in Asia today which has not been convinced of
the universal menace of the communist conspiracy.
We and our allies must not be deterred from positive action by the oft-asserted dogma that communism can¡¯t
be met with force, since it is an idea.
This is one of those misleading half
truths. Only if we and our allies believe
in ourselves and our separate institutions will we make the sacrifices with
which alone we shall win. But while
communism does win converts as an
idea, it has never captured a territory
or a government by propaganda.
On the thesis that during the recent
war we concentrated on Europe and
ignored Asia till Hitler had been
smashed, some urge that for the present
we should act only in Europe. Being inaccurate, this parallel is dangerous. We
did concentrate our greatest efforts in
Europe, but we put almost the whole of
our Navy and its air power, all the
Marine Corps and no insignificant portion of our Army into the Pacific,
where we were materially aided by our
Chinese, Australian and New Zealand
allies. When the war in Europe ended,
those forces had been sufficient to bring
the Japanese to the brink of surrender.
Furthermore, our enemy in Europe
could bring no force to bear in Asia ? 
while today our enemy can throw his
weight to east or west at will. Yet in
Asia we have adopted no over-all
policy to halt the Soviet advance or
even offered a partial challenge.
Over-all policy for the Pacific must
have well-recognized spiritual elements
as well as concrete machinery to express them. Spiritually, the United
States supports the sovereignty and independence of every state in Asia.
Every genuine movement for national
independence has the sympathy of the
American people. No objective Asiatic
must be left in any doubt that the
United States still follows its century-old policy of support to Asiatic freedom. Nehru¡¯s declaration for India,
¡±Our foreign policy is that no foreign
power shall rule over any Asiatic
country,¡¯¡¯ is an Asiatic Monroe Doctrine which should have wide sympathy in this country. We may recall
that for many years British naval
power made possible the enforcement
of our doctrine for the Americas. We
should expect to be of the same assistance to the Nehru declaration that the
British were to Monroe¡¯s.
The problem of support to colonial
peoples who have not yet achieved
their independence is difficult. The
nationalist movement in Indo-China,
for instance, is genuine. Yet, as in
China, it is perverted by communist
leadership for interests which are not
local. Similarly, despite the Japanese
origins of the Republic of Indonesia,
and of communist efforts to exploit
this region, the nationalist ambitions of the people of Java are genuine. In
both areas United States policy must
be on a month-to-month basis. In
neither area can the United States back
the restoration of the prewar colonial
empire, or yet support a movement to
bring communists into power in Southern Asia.
Since few Asiatic states have the domestic cohesion of the Western European countries, it would be difficult to
establish a Pacific Pact on the same
terms as the Atlantic Pact An automatic pledge to defend India is in a
different category from one to defend
France, for reasons of difficulty, not
principle. In the Pacific, however, nations can be divided into two groups.
The first consists of the periphery island nations, with which military alliances could be made. The second
group, the continental states, should be
bound together in a pact for consultation on common methods to check the
spread of communism in Asia. Through
discussion and agreement, ultimately
these would include economic programs
quite aa much as military.
The island states include the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand and
Japan. The continental states would be
free China, Korea, Siam, India, Pakistan and Burma. Because of proximity
to India, probably Ceylon should be
grouped with the continental rather
than the island states. For the present
the roles of Indo-China and Indonesia
would have to remain open?though
inability to include them would be a
serious weakness.
Probably even without alliance the
American people would accept a declaration that aggression against the
Philippines, Australia, New Zealand or
Japan would be considered aggression
against the United States. While many
Americans, as well as Filipinos and
Australians, would object to this formal bracketing of the late enemy with
our late allies, actually the Japanese
have been so bracketed for some time.
Ab long as American soldiers garrison
Japan, aggression against that country
would involve the United States. We
keep troops in Japan only because of potential Russian aggression. Otherwise,
we already would have made a peace
treaty and brought our soldiers home.
The American Government, therefore, should begin discussions with
the governments of these four island
states for the creation of a Pacific Periphery Alliance for joint defense. This
alliance should recognize a fifth-column-directed revolution as a form of
aggression. While such a pact would
not create much that is new in fact, it would formalize unspoken understandings,
make joint planning possible, and give more strength to the proposed 
second agreement, the Asiatic-Pacific Pact. 
American policy on Japan should be overhauled. Regardless of Russia, 
peace should be made with Japan this year, four years after japan¡¯s unconditional surrender. 
The Japanese Government should assume the responsibilities appropriate to a sovereign nation, 
with suitable limitations against 
the growth of authoritarian government incorporated in the peace treaty. 
In recognition of the menace from across the Japan Sea, however, the
peace treaty should provide for an American garrison in Japan to assist the 
Japanese in protecting themselves against aggression 
Under the peace treaty, the Japanese should assume the responsibilities of government,
while the United States should assume the costs of the garrison force. 
Morally the Japanese should pay all these expenses, but practically that is impossible. 
The occupation costs are the largest single budgetary charge
against the Japanese treasury. Without them, 
the Japanese Government could assume many other obligations
now supported by American subsidy.
Once Japan is reestablished as a sovereign nation, the Japanese can trade 
throughout the non-communist areas of the Pacific, 
and through that trade not only earn more of their own expenses 
but contribute to the rebuilding of Asia. The widest possible exchange of 
goods is an essential for a free and healthy Asia.
As for the overburdened American treasury, in any case the United States would have to support
the troops now in Japan someplace else. 
The United States cannot look
pleasure on the indefinite occupation of
Japan. Sometime the Japanese will
have to begin to provide their
own
security, although as long as the communist military menace is so near, they
will need American military support.
As a first step, the Japanese should organize a compact military force armed
with rifles, machine guns and light
artillery. We won¡¯t like that, but we
must choose between sharing responsibility for Japanese defense with the
Japanese themselves or doing the
whole job ourselves indefinitely. The
slightly more than 100,000 pistol-packing Japanese police surely are inadequate for this task, even if they found
enough pistols to go around. Organization of a Japanese military force would
be attacked as Fascistic and there would
be alarms about a new Japanese attempt to conquer Asia. We¡¯ll have to
be prepared for the uproar and accept
the risks. No defeated nation can expect to be perpetually unarmed, excepting in a world of peace and order.
Few of us see peace and order in the
world around us.
This program for Japan should be
reached through discussions with our
Pacific allies. The solution must be a
compromise and not dictated by the
United States. Our allies, however, must
expect to compromise some of their
natural bitterness toward the Japanese
in order to create a system of alliances
in the Pacific directed against aggression of any kind. It is not the Japanese
Empire which menaces this generation.
If it were more palatable, the Pacific
Periphery Alliance could be limited to
the United States, the Philippines, Australia and New Zealand, with each state
bound to the defense of Japan through
a clause in the peace treaty.
The question of military aid to Nationalist China should be re-examined
by military experts, even now. A competent military planning board should
be asked whether there is any military
aid which we can give to any part of
noncommunist China which would belikely to check the growth of communist
power. If, after study, the board should
say ¡± Yes,¡± then the United States Government should render that aid.
Pending this investigation by competent military experts, I suggest the
following as a minimum program: Communist China should be cut off from
American capital, trade and technical
advice to the same degree and under
the same limitations that Russia is cut
off. It is possible that the Chinese communists will fail in their attempts to organize and run a modem industrialized
China. But they are unlikely to fail if
we give them the assistance of our capital, our machinery, our technical skills
and the profits from our trade. We once
made the mistake of assisting Japanese
arms by supplying scrap metal and
other essentials. We shouldn't be so
foolish twice. The argument that the
communists won¡¯t like us if we do this
seems irrelevant
The problem of relief is difficult, but
soluble. We must not be frightened into
working against our own interests by
charges that we are playing politics
with human misery. There is tremendous misery in Russia, about which
we do nothing. Nonetheless, if we so
wished, we could send relief to communist China on a supervised basis. We
should require by law, however, that
no American relief goods could go to
China unless the Chinese authorities
consented to have them clearly marked,
in Chinese, as to origin, and allowed
them to be distributed under direct
American supervision. We should make
certain that no Americans participating in this program are communists or
fellow travelers, who would pass out
American food with one hand and anti- 
American propaganda with the other.
The people who get the relief must
know that it comes from the same
Americans whom the communists, in
their attempts to condition the Chinese
people for future war, are branding as
a ¡° vicious enemy.¡±
We should not recognize the communist government of China unless it has
established and maintained its authority throughout all of China for several
years. Such relations as we shall need
to have with that government we can
maintain through informal channels.
As long as an anticommunist government exists in South China, we should
give it recognition and moral support.
Especially, we should permit the free
Chinese government to maintain itself
in Formosa, where it would be relatively free from molestation because of
our control of the seas. A government
in exile which still holds a portion of the
national territory will have a far greater
pull on the loyalties of a people than
such a government established in the
remote territory of an ally. Since our
grand plan against communist aggrandizement contemplates not only the
containment of Russia but the eventual
establishment of a peaceful democratic
order, we should look forward to the
eventual collapse of communism in
China and the re-establishment of a
free Chinese government. We should not
recoil, then, from assistance to maintain the nucleus of a free government.
The United States should strengthen
its ties with the Republic of the Philippines. The Philippines not only are free
and proud ? they are lonely. China is
rapidly going communist, while Indo-China and Indonesia are in chaos. Australia, India and Pakistan work closely
together as part of the commonwealth.
Filipinos feel that their logical partner
is the United States, not China or the
commonwealth states. They also believe, however, that American interest
in Asia is not greater than theirs. As
Asiatics, they feel that often they are
capable of giving good advice to the
United States. Our Government would
do well to consult the Philippine government on all Asiatic issues?just as
Great Britain consults India and Pakistan. The effect would be excellent not
only on our relations with the Philippines but with all Asiatic states.
India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Burma and
Australia already are the nucleus of an
Asiatic bloc, with the Philippines and
Siam on the periphery. It should not be
difficult to create the second half of the
pacts for the Pacific and Asia which I
suggested earlier. The first half?the
Pacific Periphery Alliance?should be
a strong, precise, military alliance. The
second half?the Asiatic-Pacific Pact? 
should be a multilateral agreement providing for regular consultation of all the
Pacific powers which are determined to
stop the spread of communist aggression in Asia. Signatories would include
the members of the Pacific Periphery
Alliance, and, in addition, India, Pakistan, Siam, Korea, Burma, Ceylon and
free China. France, Holland and the
United Kingdom should be invited to
adhere.
The pact should state that: (1) the
maintenance of the sovereign independence of each signatory is the common
interest; (2) aggression or threat of aggression, either through invasion or fifth
column, will be resisted by all; (3) any
member may call the attention of signatories to a threat to the peace at any
time; (4) upon such notice, all signatory governments will send representatives to a common meeting place for discussion both of separate and of common
action; (5) and machinery will be created for regular conferences between
the signatories on problems of security
and peace in the Pacific and Asia.
The pact would not provide for automatic recourse to war against Russian
or other aggression. Nevertheless, recognizing common interests and providing for regular conferences on common
problems?in which the United States
would participate?it could contribute
materially to drawing member states
together, finding common economic and
political solutions, and giving the members jointly a strength which they sadly
lack today.
Reported declarations by both President Pandit Nehru of India and our
own Secretary of State to the effect
that a Pacific Pact could not take shape
until the present internal conflicts in
Asia are resolved seem unrealistic and
unworthy of the judgment of either
gentleman. It is to be hoped they will
re-examine this subject in the coming
months. A fundamental element in the
internal conflicts in Asia is the communist offensive. If we do nothing until
that is resolved we should expect to
awaken some dismal day to find the
flag of the hammer and sickle flying
from every national capitol in Asia.
Some may say the United States
can¡¯t afford to be involved even in discussions, because they would lead to
moral and financial obligations. The
real question, however, is whether communist aggression in Asia would bring
American intervention even without
previous pledges. Yes, in some parts? 
in Japan, the Philippines and Australia
certainly. Then, in advance, we should
strengthen ourselves in those areas by
the suggested Periphery Alliance, which
alone might be sufficient to deter the
aggressor. An attack on India or Pakistan also ultimately would pull in the
United States, since it would involve
the other members of the commonwealth, including Great Britain. Once
the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia were at war with Russia in Asia£¬ 
they could hardly escape battle in Europe. We
¡¯d be in it then, atom bombs
and all. So we wouldn¡¯t be risking very
much to give India and Pakistan the
kind of support recommended for the
Asiatic-Pacific Pact.
The proposed agreements would be
expensive. Could we afford them and
pay our way in Europe too? I think we
could. Our expenses in Japan probably
would be reduced as Japan got back
into foreign trade. Our potential expenditure in China is being reduced by
our continued inaction and Chinese
communist success. The sums we previously were prepared to spend to help
Chinese Nationalists should be sufficient to cover our contribution to the
Asiatic-Pacific Pact. We already are
committed to expenditures in the Philippines and Korea which would not
likely be increased by either agreement.
The question is not so much whether
we can afford this outlay?small as it
would be compared to that in Europe? 
but whether, politically and militarily,
we can afford to withhold it. We must
actively co-operate with other free nations to contain communism in Asia
while we are blocking it in Europe. How
could we afford to keep the European
peninsula partially free if the rest of the
Euro-Asiatic land mass went under Soviet communist control? Where would
that leave us?
Alone in our tight little continent? 
Not very likely. 





