Why We Went to War in Korea

Beverly Smith 

Washington Editor of The Saturday Evening Post 


Here, for the first time, is the lull story of what happened during those first dramatic hours after
the Reds struck. Who really made the decision to strike back? Acheson? MacArthur? Truman?

IN casual retrospect, our entry into the Korean
war appears as a hurried, sudden plunge. Actually the United States moved into the conflict
I step by step, in a series of decisions spaced over
the last week of June, 1950. These culminated in a dramatic exchange between MacArthur and the President, relayed via Gen. Lawton Collins and Army
Secretary Frank Pace, just before daylight Friday
morning, June thirtieth, followed by a final decision
made at the White House five hours later.
Saturday, June twenty-fourth, was a steaming
hot day in Washington, with the thermometer
climbing toward ninety-six degrees. President Truman was planning to pass a restful week end with
his wife and daughter, who were at the family home
at Independence, Missouri. Shortly before eleven
a.m. he took off from Washington in his plane, accompanied by a few members of his office staff. Ten
minutes later the plane stopped off at the Friendship International Airport, near Baltimore, where
Mr. Truman had promised to dedicate this huge
new field. He concluded his brief address with the
words:
¡¯¡¯I dedicate this airport to the cause of peace in
the world.¡±
That peace was shattered about three hours later
(3:00 p.m., EDT), while the President's plane was
cruising high over the Mississippi Valley, on the
way to Kansas City. On the other side of the world,
in the predawn darkness along the 38th parallel,
lightly armed soldiers of the Republic of Korea
started up in stunned confusion under sudden heavy
artillery fire from the north. Soon afterward North
Korean communist troops, in astonishing numbers,
spearheaded by Russian-made tanks, swarmed
across the border toward Ongjin, Chunchon and a
town whose name has since become known to the
world ? Kaesong.
The President was not to learn anything of these
events until about seven hours later. He landed at
the Kansas City Municipal Airport, drove straight
to Independence and walked into the welcome seclusion of his home. He was not scheduled to return
to Washington until Monday afternoon.
Even in Seoul, capital of South Korea, it was
some hours before the authorities woke up to the
seriousness of the attack. Sporadic raids across the
border were a commonplace; South Korean army
communications were none too good, and the troops
best able to appreciate the magnitude of the invasion were killed or overrun by the surprise and speed
of the assault.
It was not until Saturday evening that the first
press flashes reached Washington, followed soon
afterward by a telegram from John Muccio, our
ambassador in Korea, delivered to the State Department at 9:26 p.m., EDT. This, the first official
word, described the opening military moves, mentioned the tank spearheads and ended with this
appraisal:

It would appear from the nature of the attack and the
manner in which it was launched that it constitutes an all-out offensive against the Republic of Korea.

Immediately the officials directly concerned began assembling at the State Department ? including
Dean Rusk, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern
Affairs, John D. Hickerson, Assistant Secretary for
United Nations Affairs, and Philip Jessup, Ambassador-at-large. They conferred by telephone with
Secretary of State Acheson, who was at his farm in
nearby Sandy Spring, Maryland. The Department
of Defense was notified through Frank Pace, Secretary of the Army.
In Independence, Mr. Truman had enjoyed a
peaceful afternoon and a quiet dinner at home with
his family. Shortly before 8:30 P.M., CST?10:30
p.m., EDT?the telephone rang?a long-distance
call from the Secretary of State. Acheson told him
of the press reports from Korea and gave him the
gist of the Muccio telegram. The President agreed
that the situation should be brought before the
United Nations Security Council as quickly as
possible, and authorized Acheson to take the necessary steps.
The President offered to fly back at once to
Washington. Acheson advised him to get his night's
rest at home and promised to call him at once if
his presence was required. The conversation lasted
about ten minutes.
Throughout the night and Sunday morning men
worked feverishly in Washington and New York to
get the cumbersome machinery of the UN into motion. Trygve Lie, UN Secretary-General, reached on
Long Island by Hickerson shortly before midnight,
immediately cabled the UN Commission in Korea
for an independent report on the fighting, and
started his own staff on the many problems involved in calling an unexpected Security Council
meeting on a summer Sunday. The representatives
of eleven nations had to be tracked down and notified
at their various week-end retreats. Meanwhile in
the State Department the necessary papers and
resolutions were being prepared, and cables were
sent to our embassies all over the world, telling them
of our intended action before the UN and asking
them to give it al] possible support.
President Truman rose early on Sunday morning,
as usual. The morning papers already had bulletins
on the United States request for a meeting of the
Security Council on Sunday afternoon. Big headlines announced the invasion of South Korea, but
the reports of the fighting were fragmentary and the
momentum of the attack was by no means yet
apparent.
At eight o'clock Mr. Truman drove over to his
and his brother Vivian¡¯s farm at Grandview, seventeen miles south of Kansas City, where he had
planned to stay for Sunday dinner. With his brother
he looked about the farm for a while and examined
a new milking machine, but he was worried about
the situation in Korea. He decided to drive back
and await further news at his home in Independence,
where he arrived at 11:30.
At 12:35 p.m. came another call from Acheson.
He reported that General MacArthur¡¯s intelligence
officers in Tokyo, talking by telecon to General
Collins at the Pentagon, agreed with Muccio¡¯s estimate that this was an all-out attack. Tokyo also
said that American military advisers in South Korea
were asking for emergency supplies of ammunition,
and that these would be sent by MacArthur.
Secondly, Acheson reported that a telegram had
come in at 10:35 A.M.,
EDT, from John Foster Dulles, who
had returned to Tokyo a couple of days
before after a visit to Korea, in which
Dulles said:

It is possible (hat the South Koreans may
Themselves contain and repulse the attack
and, if so, this is the best way. If, however, it
appears that they cannot do 80, then we
believe that United States force should be
used. . . . To sit by while Korea is overrun by
unprovoked armed attack would start a disastrous chain of events leading most probably
to world war.

Others had undoubtedly had this
thought in the back of their minds, but
Dulles was apparently the first to put
in writing the idea of using American
military force in Korea.
Now the President decided to return
at once to Washington, which he estimated he would reach shortly after
seven p.m., EDT. He asked Acheson to
round up the chief presidential advisers, military and diplomatic, for a
dinnertime conference at Blair House.
He then sent word for his plane to be
made ready for departure, ate a hurried
lunch and drove to the airport. Mrs.
Truman and Margaret went with him
to see him off.
On the flight back, Mr. Truman
passed most of his time in the privacy
of his compartment, pondering the crisis. He had already made up his mind
to one thing: the United States must
do everything within its power, working as closely as possible with the
United Nations, to stop and throw
back this aggression. In a sense, he
felt, he had made the key decision
back in 1946, when he told General
Eisenhower, then Army Chief of Staff,
to send American troops to defend
Trieste if necessary. Truman had resolved then that we must do everything we could to prevent any part of
the free world from forceful subjection
to Soviet communist domination. From
that followed, once the course was set,
such decisions as those on Greek, Turkish and Marshall Plan aid and the
Berlin airlift. Czechoslovakia, behind
the Iron Curtain, had been beyond our
power to aid, short of certain world
war.
On helping South Korea, in the President¡¯s mind, there was no question of
whether, but only of when, how and
how much, bearing in mind that the
Korean attack might be a screen for
projected aggressions elsewhere.
The President landed at Washington
at 7:15 p.m., EDT, where he was met
by Louis Johnson, then Secretary of
Defense, Acheson and Under Secretary
of State James Webb. They drove with
him to Blair House. On the way they
told him of the action of the UN
Security Council, which in its swiftly
convened meeting of that afternoon
had voted 9 to 0 for the American
resolution. The Yugoslav delegate abstained, and the Soviet was at that
time boycotting the Council. This resolution declared that North Korea
had committed a breach of the peace.
It called for immediate cessation of
hostilities and the withdrawal of North
Korean forces to the 38th parallel. It
requested all UN members to give
every assistance to the UN "in the
execution of this resolution and to
refrain from giving assistance to the
North Korean authorities.¡± (Assistance to the South Koreans was not
mentioned in this Sunday resolution.
It was recommended by the resolution.
passed two days later, on Tuesday,
June 27, 1950.)
The Preflident reached Blair House
at 7:40, went upstairs to telephone
Mr?. Truman of his safe arrival, as he
always does after a plane trip, and
then came down to join the advisers
gathered in the Blair-Lee living room.
There were eight from the Defense
Department: Secretary of Defense
Johnson; the Secretaries of the Army
Pace), Navy (Matthews) and Air
(Finletter); the Chiefs of Staff of the
Army (Coliins), Navy (Sherman) and
Air (Vandenberg); and the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs (Bradley). From
State there were five: Acheson, Webb,
Rusk, Hickereon and Jessup.
Thus began the first of the two historic Blair House meetings which laid
out our initial steps toward entry into
the Korean war. The second was held
the following evening, Monday, June
twenty-sixth.
Secretary Johnson and General
Bradley had just returned (on Saturday) from a trip to Tokyo. They
had brought with them a memorandum
from General MacArthur on the strategic importance of Formosa. Now,
after the President joined the group in
the living room at 7:45 on Sunday,
Johnson asked Bradley to read the
memorandum aloud. He read it in full,
without interruption.
Then, a few minutes after eight,
dinner was announced by Alonzo
Fields, the colored butler and maitre
d¡¯h6tel who has served Presidents since
the time of Herbert Hoover. Mr. Truman had not been expected back until
Monday afternoon. The Blair House
staff had had to reassemble and work
fast to get dinner for fourteen on time.
Fortunately, there were frying chickens
in the freezer. The staff were rather
proud of the quickly prepared and
typically American dinner: fruit cup,
fried chicken, shoestring potatoes, buttered asparagus, scalloped tomatoes,
hot biscuits, hearts of lettuce with
Russian dressing, vanilla ice cream
with chocolate sauce, and coffee.
At dinner, conversation was general
and no notes were taken. So far as
those present remember, the talk concerned the possibilities of direct Soviet
or Chinese communist intervention,
the chance that Korea might be a
diversion to mask larger aggressions
elsewhere, and the hope that the South
Koreans might rally and hold with
the help of American arms and equipment
The main theme, though, was that
this looked like the pattern of aggression which had led up to World War
II; the risks involved in stopping it
were less, it was felt, than the dangers
of the United States and the UN ''taking
it lying down.¡±
After dinner the mahogany table
was cleared and became the conference
table. The President bad earlier said
he did not wish to make any decisions
tonight except those immediately necessary. He now asked Secretary Acheson, as the senior Cabinet officer, to
speak first.
During the preceding twenty hours
stair group from State and Defence
had been working together on emergency recommendations. With notes of
these before him, Acheson made three
suggestions. Briefly, these were:
1. That MacArthur be told to go
ahead and send all the ammunition he
could spare to Korea. (MacArthur had
already made a beginning on this.)
2. That MacArthur should furnish
ships and planes to assist and protect
the evacuation of American dependents
from Korea. The ensuing discussion
indicated an intention to give the ships
and planes a pretty broad discretion in
shooting at North Korean forces threatening to block the evacuation.
3. That the 7th Fleet be started
north from the Philippines to protect
and neutralize the island of Formosa.
On this last point there is a sharp
conflict of memories. Louis Johnson
has testified that Acheson did not make
this suggestion until the second night ? 
Monday. As he recalls it, Acheson was
opposed to protection of Formosa on
Sunday night, whereupon there was a
*' violent discussion between Acheson
and Johnson; and then, on Monday,
Acheson ¡°reversed¡± his position. I
have not been able to find anyone
else who remembers the ¡°violent discussion.¡± The memories of most of
those present, backed by certain notes
taken at the time, indicate that Acheson made the suggestion (No. 3 above)
on Sunday night; that the President
decided to start the fleet northward,
hut ?on the principle of M first things
first¡± ? deferred the decision to neutralize Formosa and made it Monday
night. Without trying to pass on the
issue between the two men, the most
important point is clear?and they
agree on this ?that the presidential
decision on Formosa was made about
9:30 on Monday evening.
After Acheson had spoken, Louis
Johnson called upon the various representatives of the Defense Department
for their views and opinions, and the
discussion became general. While the
atmosphere was intensely serious,
everyone felt he was expected to express freely his ¡°honest-to-God opinion on the situation.¡±
Three of those from Defence doubted
whether ground troops should be committed "at present¡± Partly this reflected the hope that such troops would
not be needed; partly the fear that
this might be the kickoff of a new
world war, in which case we would
have far greater worries than Korea.
President Truman asked for and was
given the latest intelligence information on Soviet strength in the Far
East, and on Chinese communist
strength ? especially in the growing
build-ups opposite Formosa.
Critics have said that America entered the Korean war rashly, without
serious thought of the great risks involved. The discussion that Sunday
night shows that the possibility of
active Russian intervention deeply
concerned Mr. Truman and his advisers from the first, and Chinese intervention was also considered. The
consensus of estimates was that the
Soviets were not yet ready for a world
war.
"But if they want it,¡± one officer
remarked, they will have it.¡± Another said,
"If we are to prevent a
world war, we have to draw the line
somewhere; we might as well draw it
here and now.¡± These quotations may
not be exact, but are correct in substance. How gravely the President
viewed the situation is best shown by
two orders he then gave: first, that an
intelligence recheck be made of other
points around the world where Soviet
aggression might strike; and second,
that a military study be made of what
efforts might be necessary, if the Soviets
actively intervened, to destroy their
bases in the Far East.
In the estimate of the problems
ahead, however, there was one missing
ingredient. No one realized the enormous strength of the North Korean
invasion army which the communists
had secretly trained and built far to
the north, and were now feeding into
the assault. Ench day's events revised
the estimates upward. Even on the
following Friday, when we entered the
conflict irrevocably, those estimates, in
MacArthur's headquarters as well as
in Washington, were still sadly short
of reality? as we shall see. Some blame
this on poor intelligence; others on a
failure to grasp the limitations of intelligence when pitted against Oriental
and Iron Curtain secrecy. But this
also may be said: If we had waited
prudently until we were sure of the
North Korean strength, it would have
been too late.
Shortly before the Sunday-night
meeting broke up at 10:55, Mr. Truman made his decisions. Others may
suggest; the President is the man responsible. Besides ordering the two
studies mentioned above, he endorsed
the suggestions by Acheson numbered
1 and 2 above, and the first part of 3
(to start the fleet north from the Philippines). He also approved a suggestion
by General Collins that MacArthur be
directed to send a survey party to
Korea to see what could and should
be done; a Navy request to start ships,
including a carrier, moving from the
West Coast; and a suggestion from
Louis Johnson to send jet planes to two
small islands east of Formosa. Since
military movements were involved, he
enjoined strict secrecy. He re-emphasized
that we must work closely with the
United Nations.
The Joint Chiefs hurried to the Pentagon to send the orders to MacArthur
by telecon. In the evacuation order,
as interpreted by the Joint Chiefs,
MacArthur was authorized to engage
in such air and naval action as necessary to prevent the overrunning of
Seoul-Kimpo-Inchon area . . . in order
to insure safe evacuation of U. S. dependents and noncombatants.
¡¯¡¯ MacArthur accepted the orders without
comment or further immediate
suggestion.
Monday the twenty-sixth was another hot day in Washington. The
President rose early, breakfasted, read
his regular morning papers ?New York
Times and Herald Tribune, Washington Post and Baltimore Sun ?and was
in his White House offices at 8:40. As
soon as his personal secretary, Miss
Rose Conway, came in, he dictated a
proposed press release on the Sunday-night conference.
There was still a chance that the
North Koreans might heed the warning
of the UN and pull back. Mr. Truman
did not want to create war hysteria,
nor did he feel free to reveal the precautionary military steps under way.
Consequently his statement, as released
about 11:00 a.m., was brief and rather
formal in tone. It praised the UN
resolution and promised that the United
States would vigorously support it. It
expressed our concern over the lawless
aggression,
¡¯¡¯and our sympathy and
support for the people of Korea,¡± as
demonstrated by the co-operative action of American personnel in Korea, as
well as by steps to expedite and augment assistance of the type being furnished under the Mutual Assistance Program." It concluded:

Those responsible for this act of aggression
must realize how seriously the Government of
the United States views such threats to the
pence of the world. Willful disregard of the
obligation to keep the peace cannot be tolerated by nations that support the United
Nations Charter.

Perhaps because of the depreciation
I of diplomatic language in recent years,
the gravity of ¡°cannot be tolerated¡±
was not fully grasped here or abroad.
Many observers got the impression
that the President and his advisers
were irresolute, or divided, or were
thinking in terms of "aid short of
war.¡¯¡¯
One friendly foreign diplomat reported to his government: "The time
has come when Uncle Sam must put up
or shut up, and my guess is he will do
neither. " This mistaken impression was
to persist for another twenty-four hours.
Such doubts were not shared by
members of the President's White
House staff who talked with him that
Monday morning. To them his grim
resolution was apparent. At one point
he walked over to the big globe in his
office and pointed out the various danger spots. Then he said,
"This (Korea)
is the Greece of the Far East. If we are
tough enough now, there won't be any
next step.¡±
During the day he received a succession of reports on the situation, including a world roundup from Central
Intelligence on other possible aggression points. At 4:00 p.m. Ambassador
John Chang, of South Korea, came in
to plead for more aid, especially in
planes, tanks and artillery. Mr. Truman could do little more at the moment
than tell him such aid was on the way
from General MacArthur, and that
the South Koreans must continue to
fight bravely so that further aid could
be effective. Reporters, noting Chang*s
long face as he left the White House,
were strengthened in their impression
that the United States was treading
hesitantly.
The President went across to Blair
House, where he had supper alone.
He was interrupted at 7:29 by a phone
call from Acheson, who said the Korean
news was now so bad that another
meeting was advisable.
¡°Have them
here at nine P.M.,¡± the President said.
At that hour the same group as the
night before ? minus Under Secretary
of State Webb ?gathered around the
mahogany table.
General Vandenberg reported that the
first North Korean plane ?a Russian built Yak ?had been shot down. ¡°I
hope it's not the last£¬¡± said Truman.
General Bradley said it was apparent
from MacArthur¡¯s latest dispatches
that the ROK ? Republic of Korea ? 
forces could not hold Seoul. In fact,
they were in danger of collapse, with
heavy casualties and much of their
equipment lost. Evacuation of American dependents was under way, but
not completed. The President then
called upon Acheson, who, speaking
from note*£¬advanced the most critical suggestion to date ?namely, that
the Navy and Air Force be ordered to
provide the fullest possible cover and
support to the ROK forces, south of
the 38th parallel.
He also repeated his suggestion that
the 7th Fleet be ordered to prevent any
attack on Formosa; that Chiang^ government " be called upon
to cease any
military action against the Chinese
mainland; and that our fleet should see
to it that there was no such action.
This time it was definitely approved.
His third suggestion was that United
States forces in the Philippines be increased and arms aid to the Philippine
Government be stepped up; his fourth,
that we immediately send a military
mission and speed up our military-aid
program to Indo-China.
Acheson added that the UN Security
Council would meet the next afternoon, Tuesday, and that we would
press for a further resolution recommending assistance to the South
Koreans.
The suggestions were then discussed,
and no objections were raised. It was
now obvious that mere arms aid would
not be enough. It was still hoped that
our air and naval power, plus the moral
effect of their intervention, would enable the ROK¡¯
s to repel the invasion.
(Knowledge of the true strength of the
North Koreans was still the missing
ingredient.) The President then made
his decision, endorsing all four suggestions, and the second Blair House
meeting ended ? Monday evening, 9:40.
As they went into the hall Mr. Truman
said, ¡± Everything I have done in the
last five years has been to try to avoid
making a decision such as I had to
make tonight.
A few minutes after the advisers
departed to put the new orders into
action, the President telephoned members of his White House staff, asking
them to set up a meeting for the next
morning (Tuesday), at the White
House, with the senior members, Democratic and Republican, of the Senate
and House Committees on Foreign Relations and Armed Services. Representatives of State and Defense would also
be present. During the next forty-five
minutes most of the congressional
leaders were notified of the meeting.
On Tuesday morning the President
worked on a statement on the four
decisions made Monday evening. He
then went over it carefully with his
advisers from State and Defense, including Johnson and Acheson, checking
and revising it. By now (he fourteen congressional
leaders were arriving at the White
House. Vice-President Al ben Barkley
was out of town. These present included Scott Lucas, t hen Majority
Leader of the Senate; Sam Rayburn,
Speaker of the Houhg; and John W. 
McCormack, House Majority Leader.
From the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee there were Chairman Connally, of Texas; Thomas, of Utah;
Wiley, of Wisconsin; and Smith, of
New Jersey: from Senate Armed Services, Chairman Tydings, of Maryland;
and Bridges, of New Hampshire.
From House Foreign Affairs there
were Chairman Kee, of West Virginia;
Mansfield, of Montana; and Eaton, of
New Jersey; from House Armed Services, Chairman Vinson, of Georgia;
and Dewey Short, of Missouri. In
all, nine Democrats and five Republicans.
The congressional leaders gathered
in the Cabinet Room, along with leaders
from Defense and State. President Truman came in promptly at 11:30. As he
walked about to shake hands with
each of the legislators his manner was
solemn, with no trace of his usual
banter
He then took his place at the Cabinet table. He said he had invited this
group down to tell them at first hand
about the situation in the Far East
and the decisions he had had to make.
He then asked Acheson to give a summary of events since Saturday. Acheson
did this. By Monday evening, he said,
the need of stronger action was apparent for two reasons: (1) the military
situation in South Korea was falling
to pieces, and (2) the governments of
the rest of the world, especially in
Western Europe, were in a state of
jitters and near panic, wondering
whether the United States would take
this lying down. If we let this pass,
other aggressions would occur one after
another, leading on to a third world
war. Hence the meeting on Monday
evening.
Now Truman spoke again. He discussed the United Nations at some
length, and the importance of our acting through, under and in accord with
the UN, rather than unilaterally. Only
if the free world stuck together for
collective security could a world war
be prevented. He then told of his
decisions of the night before. If we did
not help the Koreans, he was convinced that the rest of Asia would go
down, and Europe or the Near East
would be next. He then invited questions and threw the meeting open for
general discussion.
Wiley wanted to be sure that the
orders to MacArthur were in accord
with UN resolutions. The President
said they were, and added later that
we were pressing that afternoon for an
additional UN resolution recommending
¡¯¡¯such assistance to the Republic of
Korea as may be necessary to repel the
armed attack and to restore international peace and security to the area.¡± 
We had been assured of the necessary
support for the resolution.
Lucas hoped we would get a lot of
support in a hurry from other countries. Connally said this was the first
big test for the UN; South Korea was
the UN¡¯
s baby; if the UN failed to act
effectively now, it was through. Senator Smith and Representative Short
raised the same point as Wiley ?that
we must act with the UN rather than
alone. No one questioned the propriety of the decisions; the general attitude was one of friendly and earnest
support.
(Certain senators, recalling this
meeting, have the impression that the
question was raised whether congregational leaders should have been consulted in advance of the decision, and
whether those decisions would require
approval by Congress. This question
is not known in a memorandum made
during the meeting. Such questions
were rained, however, in a similar
meeting held on Friday, June thirtieth,
to discuss the decision committing
ground troops.)
Immediately after the meeting was
over, at 12:30, the President's statement was given to the press and radio.
The decision to use the Navy and Air
Force was greeted by a general approval and enthusiasm which few
people ?after all the war¡¯s trouble and
controversy ? now remember. Practically every major newspaper in the
country approved, with the exception
of the Chicago Tribune and its affiliate,
the
President¡¯s statement was read in
the House of Representatives, the
members rose to their feet and cheered.
In the Senate, Republicans as well
as Democrats praised the President's
leadership and appealed for united,
nonpartisan support. Two Republicans
of the far right ?Kem, of Missouri,
and Watkins, of Utah ? questioned Mr.
Truman¡¯s right to act without formal
approval by Congress. Curiously, this
view was echoed from the far left, in
the House, by Vito Marcantonio, of
New York, a man usually close to the
communist line.
Senator Taft made no immediate
comment; later he said the President
should have put his action to a congressional vote, but indicated that he
(Taft) would have voted in favor of it.
Governor Dewey, of New York, telegraphed Mr. Truman his ¡°whole-hearted¡± support of the decision.
On that same afternoon, Tuesday,
June twenty-seventh, the UN Security
Council met again, to vote on the
resolution calling on its member nations to give all necessary assistance
to the South Korean Republic. The
vote was seven in favor and one (Yugoslavia) against. The delegates from
India and Egypt did not vote, because
they were unable to reach their home
governments by telephone; both countries later indicated their support of
the resolution.
The Soviets again boycotted the
meeting. If they had attended ? they
were duly notified ? and used the veto,
it would have put the United Statesand the UN in an awkward spot. It
would have taken two weeks to convene? the UN General Assembly. It
has been generally assumed that the
failure to u8e the veto was a Soviet
blunder; that it resulted from some
mix-up or delay in orders from Moscow. But the Soviets had known for
months that the Korean attack was in
preparationìéthey had helped train
and equip it ? and they knew the issue
would certainly come before the UN.
Why, then, the abstention?
This suggests the strange possibility
that the Kremlin ?as of Tuesday, June
twenty-seventh ? was not unwilling for
the United States and the UN to intervene. The Kremlin knew ? as we did
not ? the tremendous power of the
attacking army. Might it not be a
good idea ?from the Kremlin point of
view ?to have us intervene with piecemeal forces, get a bloody nose and be
kicked humiliatingly out of Korea? 
Alternatively, if America could throw
in enough strength to hold the line, a
large part of our armed forces would be
tied down in the Korean morass. (This
view, if it was held, failed to foresee
that the Korean affair would spur
America to tremendous increases of
its armed strength. Today the forces of
America and the free world are far
greater, outside of Korea, than were
their total forces in June of 1950.)
On Wednesday, June twenty-eight,
no new decisions were made. The President was busy most of the day with
his routine and ceremonial duties, taking time out between to discuss Korean
developments with his advisers. The
news was still bad. Meanwhile the
public waited, hopefully and rather
confidently, to see what our ships and
planes could do.
On Thursday morning, at seven,
MacArthur's headquarters reported by
telecon to the Pentagon that the ROK¡¯s
had already suffered casualties of about
50 per cent. They were now trying to
form a line at the Han River just south
of Seoul; it was problematical whether
they could. Other discouraging items
came in during the morning. At 11:55
Secretary Johnson called Mr. Truman
to suggest that he have another meeting with his top advisers. It was scheduled for 5:00 p.m. at the White House.
At 4:00 P.M. Mr. Truman held his
regular weekly press conference, notable for the fame it gave to "police
action/* a term which wan to plague
him later. He did not himself actually
utter the words. A reporter asked:
"Would it be correct to call this a
police action?M Mr. Truman said,
" Yes, that in exactly what it amounts
to.¡± On that Thursday the description
seemed appropriate. It became absurd
when whole armies fought savagely up
and down the Korean peninsula. But
the President was stuck with it, and
never afterward troubled to disavow
or amend it.
The 5:00 p.m. White House meeting,
besides most of those who had attended
the two Blair House meetings, included
John Foster Dulles, just back from
Korea; Averell Harriman, hastily summoned from Paris; Stuart Symington,
then chairman of the NSRB; and James
Lay, executive secretary of the National Security Council.
Louis Johnson said our planes, operating from distant bases in Japan,
were handicapped by having little time
over the target area and by lack of
clear communication with the ROK
ground forces. Also, our planes and
ships were hampered by their restriction to South Korea; they could not
strike at communist supplies and reinforcements north of the 38th parallel.
And the primitive Korean transport
system made it hard for us to get supplies to the ROK troops. Therefore the
Joint Chiefs believed that stronger
measures were needed, not only to help
the ROK's but to ensure evacuation of
remaining American nationals. We must
have at least an American foothold in
South Korea. Johnson then read a proposed directive, which had been worked
out by Defense and concurred in by
State during the day.
This directive, after reaffirming Air
and Navy support of the ROK¡¯s, (1)
authorized our ships and planes to
strike military targets in North Korea;
(2) authorized the use of Army service
troops in South Korea (primarily Signal Corps and transport units), and
also certain combat units for the limited
purpose of protecting a port and an
airfield in the general area of Pusan.
(Note that this did not authorize use of combat troops in the combat area ? 
which was then nearly 200 miles north
of Pusan.)
The President wanted to be sure the
bombardment of North Korea was not
indiscriminate. He was also troubled
by the commitment of ground troops,
but agreed to its necessity, as did
Acheson.
Acheson then reported on a telegram
just received from Admiral Kirk, our
ambassador in Moscow. On Tuesday,
State had sent a note to Moscow asking the Soviet Government to
¡¯¡¯use its influence with the North Korean authorities to withdraw their invading
forces.¡± Now, after two days, came the
Moscow reply. As expected, it was a
refusal. It said the fighting was "provoked ¡¯¡¯ by a South Korean attack, and
put all the blame on the South Koreans
and "those who stand behind their
back.¡± Foreign interference in internal
Korean affairs, it declared, was impermissible.
"The important thing was this: certain phrases in the Soviet note and in
Kirk¡¯s telegram gave Acheson and his
advisers a clear indication that the
Kremlin did not intend to intervene
directly in Korea.
"That means,¡± commented President Truman, "that the
Soviets are going to let the Chinese
and the North Koreans do the fighting
for them.¡± This estimate has been
borne out to date. Whether the Russians intended us to divine their intention so clearly remains one of the
enigmas.
The President made his decision
affirming Johnson's draft directive
without substantial change, and the
meeting ended at 5:40 p.m. The new
orders were sent off to Tokyo.
About nine hours later, shortly before 3:00 a.m. on Friday, a telegram
came into the Pentagon from MacArthur. He had just returned to Tokyo
from a personal reconnaissance in
Korea. This was his report, and it was
a grim one. The only assurance of holding the line of the Han River and regaining lost ground, MacArthur stated,
lay in the use of American combat
troops. Therefore it was his intention,
if authorized, to move one combat
regiment into the fighting area right
away, as a nucleus of a possible build-up to two divisions from troops in
Japan for an early counteroffensive.
General Collins at once aroused Army
Secretary Pace by telephone, told him
of the telegram and said he would talk
with MacArthur by telecon and report
back later. Soon afterward the telecon
connection was put through to MacArthur. Present with General Collins
in the Pentagon end were other high
officers, and Dean Rusk representing
the State Department.
MacArthur repeated the substance
of his telegram and urgently asked
authority to go ahead. Collins said the
President, in the White House meeting
the previous afternoon, had shown concern on the ground-troops question.
Before actually putting combat troops
into the fighting zone up near Seoul,
Collins thought, the President would
want to confer again with his top advisers. It would be a few hours before
such a conference could be arranged.
Meanwhile would not the latest orders,
authorizing movement of certain service and combat units to Pusan ? down
on the south coast ? be enough to get
things started?
MacArthur replied that time was of
the essence, that present orders did not
provide enough latitude, and that an
immediate further decision was of the
most vital import. Collins then said he
would try, through Pace, to get immediate word to the President.
Collins stepped out of the telecon
room, called Pace and explained the
situation. Pace telephoned the President. The call came into Blair House
at 4:57 a.m. It was Pace's impression
that his call waked the President up;
actually Mr. Truman was up and
shaved. He took the call at the phone
on his bedside table. Dawn had not
yet appeared over the White House
grounds across the way.
When MacArthur's urgent message
was repeated to him, the President did
not hesitate. He immediately authorized sending one combat regiment to
the combat area, and promised he
would give a decision on the additional
build-up to two divisions within a few
hours. Within minutes the word was
relayed from Pace to Collins to MacArthur. Within an hour or two more
the first American troops were landing
by airlift in Pusan.
At 7:00 a.m. Col. Henry Ah alt came
in from the Pentagon to brief the President more fully on the telecon talks
and the military situation. Then Mr.
Truman called Pace and Johnson, asking them to consider the question of
the two additional divisions. At 7:30 he
called Acheson to discuss the new developments.
By 8:30, Defense Secretary Johnson,
the three service secretaries and the
four chiefs of staff were in Johnson¡¯s
office, drafting the new directive. At
9:30, accompanied by Steve Early,
then Deputy Secretary of Defense,
they entered a side door of the White
House, where they met with the President, Acheson and Harriman. By 10:00
a.m. they had discussed, and the President approved, two orders: (1) Authorizing the sending of two divisions from Japan, and (2) Authorizing, at
the suggestion of Admiral Sherman, a
naval blockade of North Korea. Note
that at this hour MacArthur, President
Truman, the State Department and
the Joint Chiefs were all agreed upon
the action to be taken. Note also that
they all still underestimated the strength
of the North Korean army, and thought
that two American divisions might be
enough to turn the tide.
At 11:00 a.m. there was a combined
meeting in the White House of the
congressional leaders?17 of them this
time, including Vice-President Barkley?the Cabinet and the various military and other advisers to the President ? 46 persons in all.
The President gave a brief synopsis
of the events of the week and then told
of the further decisions he had had to
make in the last eighteen hours. In the
discussion which followed, the legislators wanted to be assured that our
action was within the framework of the
United Nations. Mr. Truman emphasized that it was, and said that
MacArthur would be not just the
United States commander but the
United Nations commander, as well.
Senator Wherry said he thought the
President ought to consult Congress
before sending ground troops. Mr.
Truman told of the urgent series of
events in the last eighteen hours. In
this emergency he had felt it was his
responsibility to make the decisions, and
he had made them. Later, when Wherry
started to repeat his point, Dewey
Short, ranking Republican member of
the House Armed Services Committee,
broke in; he said he was expressing the
opinion of practically everyone in Congress in saying that Congress owed the
President thanks for the quality of his
leadership. The meeting was over at
11:45, Friday, June 30, 1950.
¡¯¡¯The delegation returned to the
Capitol,¡± said The New York Times
report by William S. White, ¡± in a
somber but elevated mood, in which
anxiety was overmastered by a feeling
of relief and expressed pride that the
United States was now going the whole
way in aid of the Republic of Korea.¡±
At 1:22 p.m., almost precisely six
days after the fighting started, the
orders were on the way to MacArthur.
We were in.




