ANGLO-AMERICAN RIVALRY
AND PARTNERSHIP

A MARXIST VIEW
By E. Varga

IT MAY perhaps seem presumptuous for one living in faraway
Moscow to venture into an American periodical with his
opinion concerning relations between the United States and
Great Britain. But the outlines of a mountain range are better
seen when viewed from a distance. And so perhaps also the essential
features of Anglo-American relations can be better discerned
from afar?and with the aid of the Marxist outlook? than close
at hand.
Since the Second World War the United States and Britain are
?apart from the Soviet Union? the two remaining Great
Powers. Their relations, viewed in perspective, appear a peculiar
combination of antagonism and cooperation, as a result of which
the United States is constantly gaining ascendancy over Britain,
reducing her more and more to the status of a second-rate power
in both economic and political respects. This process began nearly
half a century ago, but owing to the different effect of the war
upon the economies of the two countries it has been immensely
speeded up.
The decisive role which England played in world economy and
world politics in the nineteenth century came to an end at about
the century's close. That r61e had been based on the following
factors: England's earlier industrial development, as the result of
which she became "the workshop of the world;" her richness in
coal; a climate particularly favorable for the development of the
textile industry, then of overwhelming importance; her vast
empire, created in 300 years of wars of conquest, which towards
the end of the nineteenth century had a population of about
4OO,000,000 or one-fourth of the total population of the globe; her
merchant marine; and her banking system with its world-wide
ramifications. She was the banker of the world, including the
United States of America.
In those days England was herself a free-trade country and a
champion of free trade, in theory and practice, throughout the
world. Thanks to her head-start in industrial development and
the consequent lower production costs of her industries, she was in
a position to outbid any competitor in the world market. For this
reason she could also afford to permit the free import of goods
from other countries into her colonies. (It goes without saying, of
course, that English firms were given priority in capital investments,
railroad construction, mining concessions, government
contracts, banking, etc.) The United States and the industrial
countries of continental Europe, on the other hand, put up high
tariff walls to protect their relatively weaker industries against
the strong English competition which they could not meet in a
free market.
Politically, that was the epoch of England's "splendid isolation."
She needed no allies and looked for none. It was the time,
in naval terms, of the two-power standard ?"Britannia rules
the waves." It was the epoch of "Pax Britannica." Britain's
mastery of the seas was also a guarantee of peace for the American
continent and made the Monroe Doctrine possible, thus extending
immunity to foreign invasion to all Latin America.
But towards the end of the nineteenth century Britain lost her
position as the world's leading industrial power. She fell behind
the United States and Germany, which had meantime developed
industrially at a swift pace. Here, however, I shall disregard
Germany's development and confine myself to a comparison between
the United States and Britain. In the second half of the
century industrial production in the former developed at a much
more rapid rate than in the latter, as the following index figures
show:



BritainUnited States186034818805317199079541913100100


In other words, in the 50 years before the First World War,
Britain's industrial output trebled, while that of the United States
increased twelvefold.
Since the totals are not comparable, I shall cite figures which
are comparable (in thousands of tons) for the output of three
leading industries:

CoalIronSteelBritainUSBritainUSBritainUS1871117000420006600170020020001900225000241000900013400490010200193024400048000062003180073004060019461920005200007800410001270060000


This table shows that, whereas in 1871 the United States was far
behind Britain in respect to the output of coal, iron and steel, by
1900 she had left Britain far behind. In 1930 the United States
produced twice as much coal as Britain (apart from 123,000,000
tons of oil), and five times as much iron and steel. It also far outstripped
Britain in most branches of the engineering industry?
in the production of machine tools, agricultural machinery, office
machines, automobiles, etc.
The underlying reasons for the swift industrial development of
the United States are well known: its vast natural resources, good
climate and large areas of fertile land per head of population, and
the fact that its rich deposits of coal, oil and ores could be developed
unimpeded by feudal survivals (with the exception of the
cotton-growing sections in the South). Farming developed in
what Lenin referred to as the "American way," , it developed
from the very beginning on the lines of capitalist commodity
production untrammeled by landlords. All this created a big
internal market. As is generally known, the United States exports,
on the average, less than 10 percent of the commodities produced
in the country, with agricultural produce still representing a
relatively larger share than manufactured goods.
The policy of isolationism was a reflection of the fact that there
existed a large internal market. Compared with the industrial
countries of Europe and with Japan, the United States was less
interested in colonies. Not that it waged no wars of conquest. But
its aim was expansion on the American Continent, into areas that
could actually be made part of the home market, and in the Caribbean.
The conquest or the Philippines was an exception. The
availability of a large internal market was the economic reason
for the withdrawal of the United States from European affairs and
her refusal to become a member of the League of Nations after
World War I.
Two factors limited the American economic advance in the
nineteenth century: capital and manpower. Both of these the
United States was receiving from Europe? capital primarily
from England and manpower from the whole of Europe. The
shortage of labor had a definite effect upon the development of
American industries in the nineteenth century. Many of the immigrants,
after some years of work in the industries of the east, proceeded
westward to settle as farmers on the still free land. Wages
in industry were relatively high. It was therefore more profitable
to introduce expensive machinery than it was in England and in
continental Europe, with their lower wages. The result was that
the United States left England far behind in regard to productivity
of labor, to output per man-hour. British capital equipment
became antiquated in comparison. More industries in the United
States became able to produce more cheaply than the same industries
in Britain. The high American tariffs further impeded the
import of British manufactures, while some American manufactures
were conquering the world markets. In certain commodities,
American exports in 1914 reached the following percentages of the
total American output: sewing machines, 40.5 percent; typewriters,
30.9 percent; cash registers, 20.1 percent; bicycles, 13.3 percent.
" Manufactures were gaining m relative importance in
American exports before the war and losing ground relatively in
the import trade." ? English economists watched these developments
with anxiety. I might recall Arthur Shadwell's book,
"Industrial Efficiency," published in London at the beginning
of the present century, which drew attention to the danger
threatening England.
American competition became still keener after the First World
War. At that time, as pointed out in the Balfour Report, about
half the exports from Britain was already going to countries
within the Empire. An important contributing factor was the
preferential tariffs established by the Dominions for British
goods, with margins amounting on an average to 9 percent of the
ad valorem duties.
By way of reciprocating, Britain had by then introduced tariffs
on various commodities (tobacco, sugar, coffee, cocoa, etc.) and
granted preferences to the Dominions. During the great economic
crisis of 1929-34 this development took the shape of the system of
imperial preferences established at the Ottawa Conference in
1931. The system of imperial preferences has enabled Britain all
this time to direct about a half of her exports to Empire markets.
For example, she sold the following percentage of her exports in
Empire markets: in 1913,36; in 1929,45; in 1937,49; in 1945, 54;
and in 1946, 50.
These figures make obvious how vital it is for Britain to maintain
the system of imperial preferences. This is especially the case
today, in view of the difference in the economic effects of the
Second World War upon the United States, Britain's main rival,
from the war's effects upon Britain herself.
The United States took part in the war during a much shorter
period and? in relation to population ? with smaller forces
than Britain. Her casualties were relatively slight? 262,000
killed, or one per 500 of the population. The number of men
killed in action was much smaller than the number of Americans
killed during the same period in accidents (355,000). There were
no hostilities on United States territory, nor did it suffer from air
raids.
The war, which created a practically unlimited demand for
goods of every sort, resolved ? for the time being ? the hardest
problem that had confronted United States economy after World
War I, namely the contradiction between the output capacity of
industry and agriculture and the capacity of the home and foreign
markets. American industries, during the period between the two
World Wars, worked at only 50-60 percent of their capacity
(calculated on the basis of 300 shifts per annum), and millions of
workers in the United States were chronically unemployed during
those 20 years. Another result was the wholesale destruction of
farm produce in the thirties.
The war provided the opportunity to make full use of the productive
forces that remained unutilized in the years of peace, and
led to a further expansion of the output capacities of American
industries.'* Plants were renovated and improved and the process
of production further automatized. The result was that productivity
of labor ? output per man-hour? increased during the
war by approximately 20 percent. The gap between the United
States and Britain was thus vastly widened.
While the United States grew richer during the war, Britain ?
despite lend-lease aid from the United States and contributions
from the Dominions ? lost nearly a quarter of her national
wealth (at home and abroad). According to official English
figures," the decline by the middle of 1945 amounted to ?5,083
million: ?4,198 million abroad (?2,879 million representing the
increase in foreign debts and ?1,118 million the reduction of
investments in foreign countries), and ?885 million in Britain.
This sum does not include damage caused by the war, deterioration
of buildings due to lack of repair, or the depreciation and loss
of household articles and various stocks. Britain's total loss of
national wealth may be put, in round figures, at ?7,500 million,
or approximately a quarter of the total. And, what is worse, it is
not apparent in what way Britain can make good this loss.
Britain's output is now undoubtedly below prewar. True
enough, in December 1946 there were approximately 19,500,000
men and women "employed," against approximately 18,500,000
in June 1939. But these included an additional 1,000,000 in the
armed forces and 700,000 in " public services."" Hence the number
of men and women employed in production was smaller than before
the war.' Obviously, also -in view of the wear and tear of
machinery- the productivity of labor is not higher, and in many
cases it is even lower.
In the United States, the volume of industrial output in 1947
was 60 percent above the figure for 1939. No postwar index figures
have so far been published for Britain. But in the "White Paper"
we read: " By the end of the year [1946] the rate of national out-
put was probably not significantly below prewar over the economy
as a whole." British economy is in fact in a vicious circle.
If the national wealth is to reach the prewar level again, larger
amounts of capital must be accumulated yearly than before the
war. If consumption is to reach the prewar level, it is necessary
to produce considerably more than before the war. Since fewer
persons are employed in production, the productivity of labor
must be higher than before the war. This could be achieved only
by a thorough renovation of antiquated plants, as well as by the
replacement of plants used up in the war or destroyed by bombing.
But this would involve heavy capital investments. In other
words, in order to accumulate capital, more capital has to be invested
first."
So far, British economy, as admitted in the "WKite Paper,"
has not been able to break out of the vicious circle: " . . . capital
equipment and maintenance work . . . done in 1946 . . . was
probably much the same as in a normal prewar year. But this does
not go far towards making up arrears from six years deferred
maintenance." Even this accomplishment was possible only by
keeping the standard of living of the large masses of the British
people at about 10 percent below prewar by means of rationing
nearly all consumer goods. This is something no Conservative
Government could have achieved without provoking big mass
strikes.
Closely connected with this question is the problem of increasing
exports and balancing Britain's payments. In order to
make up for the lost income from overseas investments, Britain
would have to increase exports sufficiently above the prewar
level to attain a favorable balance of payments. In 1946, receipts
from exports and reexports amounted to ?900 million, against
?533 million in 1938. Still, there was an adverse balance of payments,
the deficit amounting to ?450 million (compared with ?70
million in 1938. To balance the payments, exports would have to
be increased by ?450 million. Since, however, British export goods
contain foreign raw materials, such as copper, nickel, manganese
ore, chromium, cotton, wool, etc., to a value of about 20 percent,
exports would have to be increased by a further ?90 million.
They would have to be raised still more if lost overseas invest-
ments were to be built up again. So far this is out of the question.
As The Economist wrote in its issue of January 20, 1947: "The
country is still running into debt abroad. Each month our balance
of overseas payments is still unfavorable."
To add to the difficulties in the way of balancing overseas payments,
Britain is buying heavily from the dollar area, while her
sales in that area are much smaller. As The Statist reported on
March 8, 1947: " I n 1946 we took 35.1 percent of our imports,
against only 22.3 percent before the war, from the dollar area,
while exporting to that area only 7.6 percent (against 10.1 percent
before the war) of our total exports. . . . That is why the dollar
loans are running down so fast."
The balancing of overseas payments seems to be a virtually
unattainable task, the more so since the imminent crisis of overproduction
in the United States will reduce the chances for the
export of British goods.
In order to make up for the adverse balance of payments for a
few years to come, Britain asked the United States for a loan on
non-commercial terms, pleading that her sacrifices in the war had
been bigger than those of the United States. After protracted
negotiations the loan was granted. But the United States categorically
demanded that Britain should give up or at least mitigate
the imperial preferences system. This demand is quite in line
with the interests of big business in the United States. For the
United States today holds a position in the capitalist economy
similar to that of England in the nineteenth century. Given equal
opportunities, she could best all competitors in the world markets.
Hence the demand for the Open Door all over the world. But,
unlike England of the nineteenth century, the United States
is opposed to free imports. Even though American industry can
hold its own against any capitalist competitor, big business still
insists on maintaining high tariffs."
It is true that in the loan agreement a reduction of American
tariffs was promised in return for the abolition of imperial preferences.
But the prospects of such a reduction are very slight.
Business representatives are, indeed, in favor of reducing tariffs
on raw materials which they have to import, but they object
to a reduction of tariffs on goods which they manufacture.
That is the stand taken by the Iron and Steel Institute, the
National Association of Wool Manufacturers, the American
Tariff League, and the like. Many of the unions belonging to
the Federation of Labor are also opposed to a reduction of tariffs.
The victory of the Republican Party in the recent elections
has further diminished the chances of any material reduction in
tariffs. Any changes may be rendered worthless by the application
of the "escape clause," which stipulates that the contracting
countries may revoke the tariff reductions if they lead to an increase
in imports which may prove seriously harmful for an
industry.
On the other hand, the experience of the twentieth century,
and especially of the 1930's, has not been lost on American capitalists
and economists. They are aware of the weaknesses of the
American economy. They understand that American industry,
with an output capacity which has increased by one-third during
the war, cannot dispose of its entire production in the home
market, that it is essential to push exports to the utmost in order
to prevent a situation where more than a half of the industrial
plant is constantly idle and there is a permanent army of unemployed,
ten million strong. With Germany, Italy and Japan for
the time being out of the running in the rivalry for world markets,
and since for some time to come the European Continent can buy
American goods only on credit, American competition is directed
primarily against Britain, against the institutions which give her
a position of advantage in her own Empire- preferential tariffs,
sterling bloc, colonies. The ultimate aim of American policy
is to break up the British Empire.
Naturally, British statesmen as long as possible took a sharply
negative attitude to the demand for the abandonment of preferential
tariffs and the sterling bloc, and strongly resented
American criticism of British colonial policy. Everyone remembers
Churchill's statement: "I have not become the King's First
Minister in order to preside over the liquidation of the British
Empire." During the framing of the Atlantic Charter and the
negotiations for the lend-lease agreement, he insisted on the
insertion of clauses protecting the imperial preferences system.
Since circumstances made it imperative for Britain to obtain an
American loan, the British eventually had to yield. But the
American policy evoked a great deal of bitterness among British
Conservative leaders. This is clearly discernible in a book by Mr.
L. S. Amery, in which the blunt charge is made that America's
foreign economic policy endangers the prosperity of other countries
and the peace:
The American system means a free field for irresponsible American surplus
production and financial power to create chaos and instability in a world of
small economic units forbidden to cooperate for their mutual benefit and tied
down by the restrictive effects of a rigid international monetary system.'*
Another prominent Conservative leader, Lord Woolton, was reported
by The Times, January 24, 1947, to have stated:
It was also stipulated that there should be conversations regarding preferences
within the Empire. There was no harm in that so long as they ended in
the right direction. There was no price on gold or dollars which could induce us
to give up Empire trade. There might have to be changes, but he was certain it
would be a very bad day for this country if it abandoned its right to trade
within its own Empire or to trade among its own people under conditions which
it determined. It would be a bad day if it allowed any other country, however
friendly, to dictate the terms of its economic policy.
I have pointed out above that the United States is now assuming
the position in capitalist world economy which England
held in the nineteenth century. As has always been the case
in history, the change in economic position has led to a change in
foreign policy. Gone are the days when American foreign policy
was based on the Monroe Doctrine, on interests confined to the
American Continent, on "isolation" from European affairs, on
aloofness from the League of Nations.
"The epoch of isolation is ended. It is being replaced by an
epoch of American responsibility," wrote The New York Times on
March 12, 1947. Today the United States is pursuing a world
policy of imperialism in the fullest sense of the term. She has a
bigger navy than all other countries of the world combined. She
has the strongest air force. She has naval and air bases all over
the world. She has the secret of the atom bomb. She has the biggest
war budget of all the countries oi the world.
Today the United States is the land in which militarism is most
in vogue. Big business is bent on using the country's military
power for the economic subjugation of the world. Dazzled by this
military power, many Americans insist that the twentieth century
must become " the American century." The present foreign policy
of the United States - the conversion of China and Japan into
semicolonies; expansion in the Middle East (oil concessions and
pipelines); the far-reaching penetration of American capital into
Italian industries and aviation; the position taken by the United
States in Africa; the 20 percent share of the United States in the
foreign trade of British India, despite preferential tariffs; the
entire foreign economic policy of the United States - entails
squeezing Britain out of her positions in every part of the world.
Historical development is unquestionably driving towards the
disintegration of the British colonial empire. Even the most astute
manoeuvring of British colonial politicians cannot delay India's
liberation much longer. And, as Curzon once said, without India
there is no British Empire. The need to balance overseas payments
makes it impossible for Britain to continue overseas government
expenditure at the rate of ?300 million (the sum spent in
1946) per annum. That is why she had to yield her positions in
Greece and Turkey to the United States. Should American policy
succeed in breaking down the system of imperial preferences and
the sterling bloc, and, consequently, severing the special economic
ties binding the Dominions to Great Britain, the latter will
be reduced to a second-rate Power with a population of 48,000,000. The United States will then remain the only capitalist
Great Power.
As reported in The Times on March 7,1947, Churchill said in the
course of the debate on India in the House of Commons that "it
was with deep grief that he watched the battering down of the
British Empire with all its glories and all the services it had
rendered to mankind." (To be sure, the peoples of India, China
and Africa have a different opinion regarding the "services
rendered" by the British Empire.)
The change in the economic basis has led to a change also in the
domestic policy of the United States. Roosevelt, as a great statesman,
understood that it was in the interests of the American
bourgeoisie itself to blunt the edge of the class struggle between
the bourgeoisie and the proletariat by timely concessions which
did not imperil the existing system. After his death, the forces of
social reaction have been gaining the upper hand in the United
States. The Republican victory in the latest elections further
strengthened these forces. The numerous plans designed to circumscribe
the rights of the working class. President Truman's
order to remove from the civil service all persons suspected of
Communist sympathies, the suggestions that the Communist
Party should be outlawed, are all signs of the times.
The internal policies of Britain and the United States are moving
in opposite directions. The Labor Government has a program
of nationalization and peaceful transition to Socialism, and the
British bourgeoisie displays flexibility in avoiding a showdown
fight with the working class. In the United States, there is growing
reaction harboring the danger of Fascism. As George Catlin aptly
remarked in The Fortnightly for January 1947, "The British Tory
shows himself these days, by comparison with his American
brother, as already half a Socialist."
How does it happen that, in spite of all these contradictions, as
Foreign Minister Molotov has pointed out, the United States and
Britain form a bloc in the sphere of foreign policy?
The basis for this bloc is the joint fight waged by the United
States and Britain to maintain the system of society existing
outside the U.S.S.R. and to counter the influence of the Soviet
Union in world affairs. The Truman doctrine, a turning point in
American foreign policy, is a clear departure from Roosevelt's
policies; whereas Bevin's policy is a direct continuation of
Churchill's. Churchill, as is now generally known, was opposed to
a second front in the west and favored an invasion of the Balkans
in order that a British army might be in existence there as a
counterpoise to the Soviet Army at the end of the war. Roosevelt's
and Stalin's objections thwarted this scheme.
The Truman-Bevin policy is finding increasing opposition in the
ranks of the Labor Party, while the British Liberals are finding
justification for Bevin's policy in Britain's economic dependence
on the United States. W. Rydal wrote in The Fortnightly in
March 1947: "The Socialist rebels who berate Mr. Bevin for a
foreign policy which, to all intents and purposes, makes Britain
into a satellite of the mighty U.S.A., might reasonably be asked to
face up to the unpalatable economic and financial facts." "
The United States and Britain are pursuing policies which
have many aspects in common. Truman's recent proposal to
finance the arming of Greece and Turkey was described by The
New York Daily Mirror as the most determined anti-Communist
step taken by the United States since 1917. And Henry Wallace
has pointed out that Truman's policy aims at having American
troops patrol the frontiers of the Soviet Union.
Britain, on the other hand, and more specifically the Labor
Party leadership, is conducting an ideological struggle against the
rising Communist influence in continental Europe. The American
ideology of unrestricted capitalism and free enterprise is hardly
likely to find a congenial soil in present-day Europe. As Attorney
General Sir Hartley Shawcross stated in a speech early this year:
"The political conflict in Europe today is not that between
Conservatism and Socialism; it is between Social-Democracy and
totalitarian Communism." "
So we see that, in spite of the serious differences dividing the
United States and Britain, the two nations are united in the chief
aims of their foreign policy. They are waging a common diplomatic
policy, as was shown, for example, at the Conference of
Foreign Ministers in Moscow. The money and armaments to
prop up the far-from-democratic governments of China, Greece,
Turkey, etc., are supplied by the United States. In its struggle
against Communism, the new democracy and the Soviet Union,
American reaction has taken the British Labor Government in
tow, despite the increasing opposition which the latter is encountering
from its own left wing.
Such are the main features of American and British policy, as
seen from a distance.

