
What is Liberalism? 


By Harold E. Strassen. 


Liberalism to me is that philosophy which seeks
the maximum of individual freedom for each man
and woman consistent with the enjoying of the
same degree of freedom by his or her fellow-men. It
has a deep humanitarian emphasis because of its concern for the freedom of one¡¯s fellow-men, and recognizes that economic suffering and distress prevents
individual freedom It is to be differentiated from the
philosophy that each man should insist upon his own
freedom and let the other fellow take care of himself.
True individual freedom includes economic, social,
political and religious freedom.
An economic system which centralizes all powers in
the hands of Government to direct men as to where
they shall work, what they may buy, where they may
live, whether it be of the Socialist or Communist form
is not liberal.
An imperialistic doctrine also clashes with true
liberalism in its failure to give consideration to the
human liberties of other men in dependent areas.
I hold that men cannot long maintain true freedom
to speak and to write and to assemble and to vote and
to worship if they are made dependent upon the will of
those in control of Government for their food£¬their
clothing, their shelter and their job.
I realize that this view runs directly contrary to the
traditional theory of the Fabian Socialists. But the evidence of history and the experiences of these recent
years vividly emphasize the dangers of concentration
of power. For every time that extreme centralized
power has been used wisely, there have been a hundred
times that it has been abused.
I believe that those of us who seek to advance the
freedom of men should invite the sincere Socialists of
the world to join with us in the modernization and rebuilding of economic freedom through capitalism, and
to modify their traditional policy of seeking centralized
governmental ownership and operation.
True liberalism endeavors to minimize discriminations, to overcome prejudices, to educate man away
from bigotry.
It also recognizes that progress should be sought in
an orderly manner, and that a blend with conservatism
into a program of joint action is frequently the best
means of advancing the cause of freedom.
True liberalism further realizes, that, except for extreme and dire circumstance£¬hasty or violent change
creates more suffering and lasting injury than it cures.
Liberalism is pioneering, but not headlong in its
march. It is determined, but not incorrigible. It is
idealistic, but not visionary. It values opportunity
above security. It holds that men are brothers. It
believes that man was meant to be free. 

By Henry A Wallace

Liberalism is the credo of those who have no fear
B of the idea of change. Its core£¬as I see it, is
a willingness to place human rights first and
property rights second, or as Lincoln put it: ¡°I am
for both the man and the dollar, but in case of conflict
I am for the man.¡±
Liberalism is confidence that through democratic
methods we can achieve a society in which the benefits
science makes possible will be available to all men. It
is confidence that when the free flow of ideas is not
stopped, the judgment of the majority will advance the
general welfare. Yet liberalism recognizes that this
collective judgment may sometimes be wrong, and that
the right of minorities to dissent must be preserved.
In this new age?this atom age?when the world
cannot afford another armed conflict, liberalism demands opposition to all talk that war is inevitable. It
demands that we seek out the conditions which could
lead to war, and that we dispel these conditions without perverting science and wasting human energies
and natural resources in preparation for conflict.
Liberalism demands that we root out the fears which
lead to the suppression of civil liberties.
Genuine liberalism demands opposition to self-righteousness and smugness. The major task of the
American liberal is to prevent the suppression of
liberalism at home in the name of fighting anti-liberal
practices abroad.
Liberalism is a recognition that there is no justifiable reason for another war, that there is no condition carrying the seeds of war which can be remedied
by force or threat of force.
Liberalism demands that there be no price for honest,
forthright expression. Free speech is not free if it is
limited by fear of losing a job£¬by fear of business
'reprisals, or by fear that frankness endangers naturalized citizenship. Liberalism demands action against the
vile practices of segregation and discrimination.
Here in the United States today, liberalism demands
an all-out fight against those who pervert the language
of democracy as they advance programs which contravene democracy. It demands opposition to the criminal
political practice of ¡°Red-baiting.¡± The word ¡°Communist¡± has become a far greater menace to the
American system than the actual Communist ideology,
o NE of the tenets of traditional liberalism was
opposition to government planning. But the pendulum
has swung since the Victorian period and in the highly
complex society of the mid-twentieth century unrestrained corporate power?a product, in part, of the
older liberalism??is the greatest threat to freedom, Today¡¯s liberalism requires that we engage in sufficient
government planning to assure the maintenance of independent enterprise and full employment, and to
guard against excess in business cycles. 

Henry Truman 

OUR first goal is to secure fully the essential
human rights of our citizens.
Some of our citizens are still denied equal opportunity for education, for jobs and economic advancement, and for the expression of their views at the
polls. Most serious of all, some are denied equal protection under our laws. Whether discrimination is
based on race, or creed, or color, or land of origin, it
is utterly contrary to American ideals of democracy.
Our second goal is to protect and develop our human
resources.
One of our ultimate aims must be a comprehensive
insurance system to protect all our people equally
against insecurity and ill health. Another must be
an adequate education for every person. Within the
next decade, we must see that every American family
has a decent home.
Our third goal is to conserve and use our natural
resources so that they can contribute most effectively
to the welfare of our people.
As a nation we are coming to appreciate more each
day the close relationship between the conservation of
these resources and the preservation of our national
strength. We must vigorously defend our natural
wealth against those who would misuse it for selfish
gain.
Our fourth goal is to lift the standard of living for
all our people by strengthening; our economic system
and sharing more broadly among our people the goods
we produce.
In the next ten years, we can increase our annual
output by at least one-third above the present level.
We can lift our standard of living to nearly double
what it was ten years ago. If we distribute these gains
properly, we can go far toward stamping out poverty
in our generation.
Our fifth goal is to achieve world peace based on
principles of freedom and justice and the equality of
all nations. 
We are following a definite and clear foreign policy.
That policy has been, Is now and shall be to assist
free men arid free nations to recover from the devastation of war, to stand on their own feet, to help one
another, and to contribute their full share to a stable
and lasting peace. We believe in freedom, and we are
doing all we can to support free men and free governments throughout the world.
The great ideals of liberty and justice are powerful
forces in the hearts of men in every country. The
faith ta God that sustains us, also sustains men in
other lands¡£Together we can erect an enduring peace. 

TEFT 

THE term ¡°liberalism¡± in its political sense is very
closely akin to the principle of freedom. The
connection between liberalism and liberty is no
chance similarity of words- Early liberals were men
who constantly wanted more freedom. Today everyone
goes around calling himself a liberal Unfortunately
there is a tendency to attach the term to anyone who
supports every change proposed?even if the change
would lead to serious limitations on freedom of thought
or freedom of the individual. Such a man is a radical,
a sentimentalist, not a true liberal. 
Liberalism implies particularly freedom of thought,
freedom from orthodox dogma, the right of others to
think differently from one's self. It implies a free
mind, open to new ideas and willing to give them
attentive consideration. In these days of propaganda
machines each claiming to represent the liberal point
of view£¬every true liberal must do his own bard
thinking to determine for himself which so-called liberal program is actually leading in the direction of
thought and freedom of the individual
We have proposed to us in Congress many measures
to illustrate what I have in mind- I cannot see any
true liberal favoring, in time of peace, price control,
rationing, allocation control, compulsory military
training or compulsory Federal health insurance.
A true liberal approaches new programs of every
kind with sympathetic consideration, but also with
careful analysis.
A true liberal favors the accomplishment of social
ends through the cooperative action of the people
themselves; if that is not effective he favors such
accomplishment by the action of local communities
in solving their own problems. I believe very strongly
that the Federal Government should limit its assistance in the field of social welfare such as education,
health and housing, not act as administrator of programs which belong to state and local communities.
In the economic field a true liberal tries to avoid all
detailed regulation by the Government, but he is concerned to find a long-range plan to eliminate without
detailed Government controls those cyclical depressions which have brought such hardship to America.
He examines every proposal made whereby, without a
limitation of freedom^ the Government through its own
fiscal policy, through a general control of credit and
through the restraint of arbitrary and unreasonable
monopoly, can keep the channels of trade open and
stable.
In the United States, liberalism means the resumption of progress under those historic American principles of liberty which have kept our people free and our
economy free, principles which have made the United
States the greatest and most productive country in the
world today.

Thomas E Dewey

No words in our language have been more distorted and falsely interpreted than the terms
¡°liberal¡±and ¡°liberalism? f Many truly progressive thinkers fight shy of the words for fear of the
corruption from which they suffer today. So it is particularly timely to re-examine and evaluate their real meaning.
¡°Liberalism" derives from the same word root that
gave us ¡°liberty,¡± It seems perfectly clear to me that
no man has a right to call himself a liberal unless he
believes explicitly, implicitly, spiritually and concretely
in economic, social, and, most of all, human liberty.
In recent years we have seen the preposterous spectacle of men and women vehemently waving the banner
of their self-styled liberalism on the side of the worst
enemies of all liberty. There are groups in our midst
where an individual who expresses even a mild distrust
of totalitarianism and the police state encounters instant denunciation as a ¡°reactionary.¡±
Our inalienable American rights to life, liberty and
the pursuit of happiness imply not merely the utmost
freedom of conscience for ourselves but lay upon us
the duty of protecting others in such freedom. I dislike the use of the word ¡°tolerance.¡¯ It is not enough
to tolerate a person or a group whose beliefs differ
from ours; we must live in amiable neighborliness and
mutual respect- This applies with equal force to differences of race and color. The right to freedom of
action stresses the right of others to think and speak
without abuse though their methods of improving a
free society may differ from ours. It includes every
right to work and achieve which does not impair or
infringe upon the rights and dignity of others.
The right to the pursuit of happiness includes the
practical, everyday effort to achieve a decent share
of material prosperity. It includes the right to work
under conditions which make that work a satisfaction
and, consequently, most productive. It means work
that is amply rewarded in order that we may provide
for our families the happiest of possible living conditions.
Also and inseparably it includes the duty to see that
such conditions are made and kept available to others
on an increasing scale.
Implicit in all these rights and duties is their exercise within a framework of self-government.
True liberalism springs from our deepest spiritual
aspirations. It is as old as the Ten Commandments
and the Sermon on the Mount. It practices the brotherhood of all men and places first the dignity of the
individual, his opportunity and personal liberty. It
fights tyranny and regimentation of every kind and
insists that Government exists to preserve the freedom of human beings, never to be their master.

Earl Warren 

LIBERALISM, as I understand it
is the political
belief, and the political movement arising out of
" the belief, that the individual should be the all
important precious object of consideration in every
phase of social relationship. This belief, and this movement, born of faith in mankind and in the dignity of
the human soul, have found their finest expression thus
far in our Western civilization. Civil rights, representative government, and equality of opportunity are
all part and parcel of the liberal tradition. These institutions have been building slowly but steadily and they
are still unfinished. All of them are designed to protect
the individual from domination either by Government
or by any privileged group. 
Unfortunately, this great term has been abused and
distorted in recent years. It has become the disguise
of Communists and Communist sympathizers who are
interested neither in the freedom of the individual nor
in liberal institutions. It is for this reason that many
people suggest a realignment of politics in our own
country in two groupsìéconservatives and liberals. This
would be a mistake because the term conservative, like
the term liberal, has also been distorted. Many who
style themselves conservative are in fact reactionaries.
If I had the choice of classification I would divide
people politically info three groups?reactionary, progressive and radical. I particularly like the term
'¡®progressive,¡¯¡¯ not necessarily as a party label, but as
a conception. To me it represents true liberalism and
the best attitude that we could possibly have in American life. It is distinguishable from both reaction and
radicalism, because neither of these philosophies make
for real progress. The reactionary, concerned only with
his own position^ and indifferent to the welfare of
others, would resist progress regardless of changed
conditions or human need. The radical does not want
to see progress because he hopes that our democratic
institutions will fail and that he will be able to take
over with some form of alien tyranny.The progressive, however, realizes that democracy
is a growing institution and that, if it Is to succeed£¬
we must have steady advances from day to day to
adapt it to human requirements on an ever-widening
base. The progressive has faith in democracy. He is
determined to work for its improvement and has the
courage to develop it through trial and error, seeking
to assure real freedom£¬not merely to a few, but for
all, and to this end he is willing to subordinate his
private interest to the common good.
I BELIEVE that the great body of American people,
regardless of what party they are in, are progressive
and liberal in this sense, and the finest thing that
could happen to our political system would be to have
such liberal thought and action dominate both parties.
