FACES£¬BUT NOT POLICY,
CHANGING AT KREMLIN

Stalin Is the Master, and Moscow¡¯s
Attitude Remains Aggressive

PARIS, March 19?The biggest
overhauling process in the Soviet
Government since 1939, when
Vyacheslav M. Molotov replaced
Maxim Litvinov and Joseph V.
Stalin named himself Prime Minister, has been taking place in
Moscow.
Clearly Mr. Stalin has decided
for reasons known best to himself
to alter the makeup of the governmental apparatus in terms of both
?internal and foreign affairs. His
unwieldy Cabinet has been reduced
. in size and three former construction ministries have been welded
into one.
In any other country it would
have been a simple thing to analyze the meaning of these clearly
~ important alterations in governmental personnel. There would
have been open debate and adequate public explanation. Such unfortunately is not the case ir mysterious Moscow. One is left to
speculate on the significance.

Outsiders Puzzled

It will take weeks or months before anyone, including diplomats
stationed in Moscow, can make an
accurate attempt to assay the reasons for and the results of these
changes in the Soviet hierachy.
At present analysts are more or
less in the position of one ambassador who frankly told his
Foreign Office he did not consider
it possible to give an intelligent
opinion yet.
However, one can safely make
these three basic statements:
(1) The fundamental governing
structure and force remains precisely
the same.
(2) There is no sign of any let up
in the aggressive attitude of
the Soviet Union toward the West.
(3) The internal changes appear
to be dictated by a desire for efficiency.
? Regarding the first point, the
proverbial saying that ¡°the more
things change the more they re- -main the same¡± appears particularly apt. The Soviet Union remains governed by one man, Premier Stalin, through his control of
the Bolshevik party, which is itself supra-governmental.

Party Role Is Key

Whether the aging leader
moved Mr. Molotov upstairs as a
preparation for some form of
quasi-regency in preparation for
. Mr. Staling death or retirement
remains to be seen.
Real control of the Soviet Union
will remain in the hands of the
man who controls the Communist
party. This was the case when
Nikolai Denin died. The cool political efficiency
of Mr. Stalin eliminated
from the field such brilliant
rivals as Trotsky, Bukharin, Rykov
and Zinoviev.
No matter who succeeds Mr.
Stalin as Prime Minister, the real
inheritor of power
the man who gains
again will be
control of the
party.
Since Andrei A. Zhdanov's removal
from power, followed by his
death, the leading contender seems
to be George M. Malenkov, a
48-year-old machine politician with
a card-index memory. His quiet
career resembles that of Mr. Stalin
under Lenin.
The topmost men in the Soviet
Union today are the secretaries of
the party, Mr. Stalin, Mr. Malenkov
and Andrei A. Andreyev. In
the innermost circle are ten members
of the Politburo, who, in addition
to the party secretariat, are
Mr. Molotov, Marshal Klementy
E. Voroshilov, Lazar M. Kaganovitch,
Mr. Mikoyan, Nikita Krushchev,
Lavrenti P. Beria and Mr.
Voznesensky, and the three Politburo
alternates, Nikolai M. Shvernik,
Marshal Nikolai A. Bulganin
and Alexei N. Kosygin. 

Organizational Bureau

Almost equally important is the
organizational bureau of the party,
which includes seven men; Mr.
Stalin, Mr. Andryev, Mr. Malenkov,
Mikhail A. Suslov, Mr. Kaganovitch, Lieut. Gen. Lev
Zakharovitch Mekhlis and Nicola
A. Mikhailov. It will be noted that 
only Messrs. Stalin, Andreyev
Malenkov and Kaganovitch are on
both party bureaus and only the
first three are also party secretaries.
Thus it is evident that despite
the changes that have been taking
place, basic control of Soviet policy
remains in the same hands. Only
if Messrs. Mikoyan and Molotov
are removed from the Politburo
could one be sure their stars were
descending.
So far as Soviet foreign policy
goes it is indicated that Messrs.
Vishinsky and Gromyko, neither
of whom holds an important party
position; will continue to administrate
the tough attitude developed
by Mr. Molotov since the war.
Soviet policy can be gauged by
two means. One is open diplomacy
paralleling that of other nations.
The other is foreign policy as expressed
through international communism?
the Comintern until 1943
and the Communist Information
Bureau (Cominform) since 1947.
Mr. Malenkov, who founded the
Cominform, together with Mr,
Zhdanov, now appears to remain
its chief?at least until another
boss is revealed. The Cominform,
just before the Molotov-Vishinsky
switch was announced, stepped up
its anti-Western line. A series of
political reorganizations in foreign
Communist parties and of planned
sabotage and strikes had been
prepared on a virtually martial basis.
Therefore one can assume until there is 
reason to believe otherwise that Moscow¡¯s attitude toward the
Western world will remain just as difficult as it was under Messrs. Molotov and 
Zhdanov. it is reasonable to suppose that the Kremlin
will have to act very differently before the 
very differently before the West
considers seriously any ¡®peace offensives.¡¯

Strain on Economy

Internally, one can speculate |
with logic that the shifts have been
made to improve' the unwieldy Soviet bureaucracy. Now embarked
on a record peacetime rearmament
program, the Soviet economy is
being subjected to a vast strain,
especially when one considers the
damage it suffered during the war.
It is perhaps a good guess that
Mr. Voznesensky is being held responsible
for the shortcomings of
the five-year plan, especially in the
production of steel, one of the
basic sineWs of military strength.
Likewise, it is obvious that the
PoKtburo felt a smaller Cabinet
could more easily centralize the
sprawling administrative apparatus.
In summary, according to present
indications, it would be quite
as foolish for the United States
to count on shifts in Soviet policy
as a result of governmental
changes as it would have been
for the Kremlin to have argued
that the departure of Secretary of
State Marshall and the resignation
o? Secretary of Defense Forrestal
from President Truman¡¯s Cabinet
meant a new United States foreign
policy.
Only if the intensified ¡°cold
war¡± conducted by the Cominform
ceases and only if Soviet diplomacy
commences to demonstrate
friendship on a factual basis can
his assumption be altered.
