Guns and a Little Butter
BY THOMAS SANCTON



The $42,000,000,000 budget submitted to Congress
by the President last week is a massive
technical document which is superior in many
respects to the three previous post-war budgets. It will
probably stand up in the Eighty-first Congress under
any analysis or challenge that keeps within the framework
of the cold war¡¯s dominant military rationalization. Expenditures for the armed services have been held
to a size generally considered safe but adequate.
Sums for the domestic social programs on which the
President campaigned have been increased. The total is
manageable at the present rate of national income and
production, and increased taxes will minimize the inflationary
effects of government spending. Yet it is a
budget which politicians and economists of the 1930¡¯s
would have found incomprehensible, and it demonstrates
conclusively the limited validity of comparisons between
the Fair Deal and the New Deal.
The obvious similarities only provide further evidence
of the recent enormous growth of militarism. No very
great disparity appears, for example, in the budgeted
costs of the social-security programs of the two periods.
Many of the largest New Deal programs were financed
for $100,000,000 or $200,000,000. Wherever President Truman¡¯s message deals with sums of this order,
the reference 1s usually to domestic legislation, and even
lumped together, the ¡°Fair Deal¡± increases seldom hit
the billion mark. It is chiefly in the sections relating to
military costs that we meet the billion-dollar figure.
Seventy-six cents of every federal dollar spent in the
fiscal year 1950 will be used for costs arising from the
last war, for foreign programs directly related to the
cold war, and for maintenance of our military establishment.
Six cents will go for the health and security
programs; five cents for preservation and development
of natural resources; thirteen cents for the support of
government agencies and functions. And military expenditures
are even heavier than this breakdown indicates.
One would think that ¡°development of natural
resources¡± meant activities like flood control and soil
reclamation, but $725,000,000 of the $1,861,000,000
requested for this purpose. is earmarked for the Atomic
Energy Commission. Recent statements of the commission¡¯s
chairman indicate, moreover, that research IS still
centered on the development of fissionable materials
rather than on processes of maximum peace- time value.
The newspapers of the country, in their editorial
pages, have swallowed the military items of the budget
at a gulp but are gagging on the smaller sums assigned-
to social welfare. The Washington News, for example,
decides that the ¡°budget would push spending beyond
safe limits¡±-- making it clear that the reference is to
non-military spending.
IN POINT of fact the social programs will come closest
to paying for themselves. The budget makes the following
three recommendations, which seem very generous:
(1) the extension of social security to 25,000,000
gainfully employed who are not covered by the present
law, and an Increase in benefit payments; (2) creation
of disability Insurance; (3) a compulsory national health insurance
program. To pay for these benefits an additional
$2,000,000,000, unrelated to the other tax increases
requested, will be collected directly from the
beneficiaries and their employers by an increase of
three-fourths of 1 per cent in the social-security tax.
The present rate of 2 per cent has renamed stationary
since it was first levied, though original legislation provided
for an increase years ago. In theory and in practice
not even the individual employer fills the role of Santa
Claw in this transaction, for the improvement in the
morale, health, and efficiency of his work force, imperceptible
though it may be in specific cases, pays him
dividends.
The $290,000,000 for education will be an outright
subsidy. But this money wlll be disbursed to the states
and will retard the terrible waste of human resources
going on in some of them. While many states in the
deep South spend more for education, in proportion to
their total income, than any others in the nation, their
school systems are inadequate, and both the states and
the nation pay the cost In many ways. Compared with
various individual Items in the armed services' budgets
this sum IS Inconsequential. Were not the entire budget
a monument to the destructive ends toward which an
nations are turned in this era, the meagreness of the
education program would be more apparent.
The budget asks $100,000,000 a year for five years
for slum clearance, and a first-year appropriation of
$129,000,000 to launch a low-rent housing program
Intended to produce a million public-housing units In
Seven years. This program doubles the goals envisioned
In the Taft-Ellender-Wagner act, and in so doing provides
concrete evidence, as does the entire domestic
program, of what ordinary citizens have gamed by
electing Truman rather than his Republican opponent.
Yet the goals set remain far below national needs, as
most public-housing groups not identified with the
real-estate lobby agree. And when all of these units
are provided, several million low-income citizens, many
of them veterans, will still be looking for homes that
they can buy for less than the $15,000 or $20,000 that
the budding industry has set as its minimum.
When one comes to the military items in the budget,
these social programs fade into insignificance. In fiscal
terms. Actual defense expenditures are summarized as
$14,268,000,000, well within the fifteen-billion-dollar
telling fixed and resolutely defended by the President
in the face of great pressure from the military and from
Industry. But there is a vagueness in the bookkeeping
here that defeats %the average understanding. Altogether,
the budget asks for $13,200,000,000 in new military
appropr1atlons, plus $2,100,000,000 in cash to pay for
defense contracts authorized by previous Congresses, plus
authority to negotiate new contracts amounting to
$2,700,000,000, for which future budgets will provide
the actual cash. Cash and credits asked from the
present Congress therefore total $18,000,000,000.
Actually, of course, it will not be difficult to track these
items down to their final nesting place in the 1949, 1950,
and 195 1 budgets. Yet a medical-insurance or education
appropriation could get lost in these carry-over military
¡°extras¡±.
The European Recovery Program will cost $4,500,000,000 in 1950, a decrease of $100,000,000 from the
current year; but requests for foreign-relief financing
reach a total of $6,349,000,000. Interest on the public
debt, four-fifths of which represents deficit financing for
the last war, will cost $5,450,000,000. Veterans¢®? benefits
and services are estimated at $5,500,000,000. This
IS a decline of $1,300,000,000 from the current year,
the largest reduction in the budget. It is due to the fact
that a large number of veterans have exhausted their
¡°fifty-two-twenty¡± unemployment pay. But economies
have also been effected by the cancelation of twenty-four
building projects for a projected system of regional.
hospitals and a reduction in the capacity Df fourteen
others.
The fact that a certain social-security program may
largely pay for itself does not of course disqualify a
defense appropriation, which once spent is gone forever-
Legitimate expenditures for social security and defense
are actually incommensurable in financial terms, though
in their highest sense they are directed toward the same
goal, #the safety and preservation of the nation. But it
shows blindness on the part of many powerful conservative
elements to argue against this concept. Such
critics, who grasp recklessly for the billions that will
profit them in the narrowest sense but vehemently oppose
sound social legislation, are ultimately the wreckers
of their society and unconscious agents of the foreign
enemy they fear. The nature of Mr. Truman¢®?s campaign
and the firm limits he has set to spending of the worst
sort assure us that the budget which has emerged under
his direction IS the best that the President was able to;
produce under existing circumstances. It is obvious that
the irresponsible men who form at least one element in
high military and industrial circles have not been without
influence on what this nation will spend in 1950 for
arms and for man. Ex-President Hoover himself has at- tested that one group in the Pentagon had such an ¡°unrealistic¡± understanding of the economic and social
structure of the nation that it sought originally a thirty-
billion-dollar appropriation for defense instead of the
 half that sum ultimately budgeted. How can such men be
entrusted with any grave decisions bearing on national
welfare? What validity can their opinion have on the
need for social programs, which inherently they detest,
and which they obstruct at every opportunity?






