Chapter 11
Toward Peace in Asia

WE MUST never forget that World War II began in the Pacific.
The first scene of the drama that ended on board the USS Missouri on
September I, 1945, took place in Manchuria in the same month in 1931.
The scenes that followed were of varying interest to us in the United
States?Italy¡¯s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935, civil war in Spain in 1936,
Japan¡¯s attack on China in 1937, the fall of Austria and Czechoslovakia
in 1938, and Hitler¡¯s invasion of Poland in 1939. But all of them led us
inexorably to the tragic action at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.
If we regard Europe as the tinderbox of possible world conflagration,
we must look upon Asia as a great smoldering fire. There, civilization
faces the task of bringing a huge mass of humanity, the majority of the
people on this earth, from the Middle Ages into the era of atomic
energy.
In China, unfortunately, the end of one war has brought the beginning
of another. Our most earnest efforts there, for the present at least, have
failed. But Japan has made heartening progress toward matching in the
political, economic, and social fields its earlier swift absorption of the
technical aspects of modern civilization.
The feudalistic control of Japan¡¯s economy by a few families has been
proscribed; state religion and the worship of the Emperor as a deity have
been abolished; the right of the people to organize and to elect their representatives
freely has been established. These, and similar changes are a
start toward a democratic society; they and the speed with which they
have been effected is in contrast to the usually slow tempo of human
affairs. Much of this progress is due to the wise administration of General
Douglas MacArthur. Some of it comes, I believe, from our decision to
continue the institution of the Emperor under our own conditions and
to use it as an instrument for carrying out the instructions and policies
of the Supreme Allied Commander.
Immediately upon becoming Secretary of State, I learned about the
differences of opinion in the State Department as to whether, at the
time of surrender, we should insist on the removal of the Emperor. Before
we left for Potsdam, I was presented with memoranda setting forth
the varying views. These went into a brief case bulging with the problems
of war and peace in the Pacific.
President Truman and Generalissimo Stalin discussed Russia¡¯s entry
into the war against Japan at their first meeting on July 17. The Generalissimo
said he had not yet succeeded in reaching an agreement with the
Chinese?a prerequisite to the Soviet declaration of war. He told the
President that his negotiations with Premier T. V. Soong would be resumed
again after the conference. Among the questions still unsettled
was a regime for the port of Dairen. President Truman declared that the
United States wanted to make sure Dairen was maintained as an open
port. Stalin replied that, if the Soviet Union obtained control of the port,
it would have that status. I pointed out that, under the agreement President
Roosevelt had entered into at Yalta, China was to retain control
of Dairen.
We received a report that Soong had told his government the Soviet
Union was making claims extending beyond the Yalta agreement. Since
the negotiations were taking place in accordance with a commitment made
by President Roosevelt, I was interested. I was afraid Soong would find
it difficult to resist Soviet pressure and would make additional concessions
if he were in doubt about our attitude. Therefore, with the approval of
the President, I sent a message to the Chinese Government saying we
would not advise making any concessions that went beyond the terms of
the Yalta agreement.
The Chinese and Russians subsequently reached agreement, but events
have shown that our concern about Dairen was justified. Two years after
Japan¡¯s defeat, Dairen still is not a free port. Before a ship can enter the
port, it is necessary to obtain clearance from Moscow, not only for the
vessel but also for its personnel.
At a later meeting Stalin told the President and me that the Japanese
Ambassador in Moscow had asked whether the Soviet Union would agree
to act as a mediator to bring about the settlement of the war. This request,
Stalin said, did not indicate a willingness to surrender unconditionally as
the Allies demanded; it was phrased so generally that Mr. Molotov simply
told the Ambassador that he would discuss the matter with him later.
Subsequently, Stalin said, the Japanese Ambassador presented another
message. This stated that the Emperor wished to send Prince Konoye to
Moscow with a message saying that Japan wanted to end the war but
had decided to fight on with all its strength as long as unconditional surrender
was demanded. Stalin added that a letter was then sent to the
Ambassador stating that the character of the indicated message was general,
contained no specific proposal, and therefore it was impossible to
give a definite reply. President Truman expressed his approval of Stalin¡¯s
action.
Meanwhile, Secretary Stimson informed us that he had received reports
from New Mexico on the test of the atomic bomb on July 16. The
reports made it clear that the bomb had met our highest hopes and that
the shock of its use would very likely knock our already wavering enemy
out of the war. Before the experiment we had agreed that, if it proved a
success, we would not use it without issuing a final solemn warning to
the Japanese.
Secretary of War Stimson, on July 2, had submitted to the President
a wise memorandum setting forth a proposed message to Japan. Using
this memorandum as a basis, the President prepared a draft of a declaration
to be issued jointly by the United States, the United Kingdom and
China. The President and I spent some time on it. Then Prime Minister
Churchill made some suggestions which were adopted. The declaration
to which Mr. Churchill agreed followed the general lines of Secretary
Stimson¡¯s proposal except that it did not contain a reference to the future
status of the Emperor. The proposed declaration then was sent to Chiang
Kai-shek for his approval.
On Thursday, July 26, the conference recessed to enable Mr. Churchill
and Mr. Attlee to go to London to receive the results of the British election.
President Truman utilized the opportunity for a trip to the headquarters
of the American zone of occupation at Frankfurt. I accompanied
him. Wherever the President reviewed troops abroad, commanding officers
managed to have the band play ¡°The Missouri Waltz,¡± and presented
to the President the Missourians among the commissioned officers of
the outfit. Like all Senators and ex-Senators, the President is ¡°state
conscious.¡± He liked it, and by the end of the day he had almost concluded
Missouri had won the war. He enjoyed making to me the facetious
charge that South Carolina had not participated in the war. The President
rode in an open car, first with Brigadier General Doyle O. Hickey and
later with Major General A. G. Bolling, commanding the Third Armored
and the 84th Infantry Divisions. After each stop he would tell these
officers that I had not yet found any South Carolinians among the troops.
Finally, Pfc. Warren E. Baker, who was driving the President¡¯s car,
could stand it no longer. He swung around in the driver¡¯s seat and said:
¡°Mr. President, I would like to say that I am from South Carolina,
and I live just around the corner from the Secretary of State.¡±
The President laughed heartily and at the next stop told me the story.
He liked the courage of the young private in telling the President of the
United States in the presence of a Major General that he was mistaken.
The boy did demonstrate pride in his state and also the spirit that helped
to make what I believe was the greatest army in the world.
When we returned to the ¡°Little White House¡± that evening there
were two messages for the President. The first one was from Ambassador
Winant with the surprising news of Churchill¡¯s defeat and the second was
from Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek approving what is now known as
the Potsdam Declaration.
The declaration was immediately released for publication and a copy
was sent by special messenger to Mr. Molotov. It pointed out that the
combined forces of the three Allies ¡°are poised to strike the final blows
upon Japan,¡± and that the experience of Germany ¡°stands forth in awful
clarity as an example to the people of Japan.¡± It warned that the might
converging on Japan ¡°is immeasurably greater¡± than that which laid
waste Germany.
¡°The full application of our military power, backed by our resolve,¡±
the declaration continued, ¡°will mean the inevitable and complete destruction
of the Japanese armed forces and just as inevitably the utter destruction
of the Japanese homeland.¡±
The declaration then set forth in seven paragraphs the terms under
which the government of Japan was called upon to proclaim its unconditional
surrender. They were phrased so that the threat of utter destruction
if Japan resisted was offset with hope of a just though stern peace if she
surrendered. It is tragic that the Japanese chose to reject this offer.
Mr. Molotov telephoned later in the evening asking that the declaration
be held up two or three days. When he was told it already had been released
he seemed disturbed. The next day I explained it had not been submitted
to him before release because we did not want to embarrass the
Soviet Union by presenting it with a declaration affecting a country with
which it was not yet at war. He did not say he desired to make any change
but said simply that we should have consulted him.
Two days later, on July 29, Mr. Molotov called again. It had been
agreed that the President and I would meet with him and Generalissimo
Stalin, but Mr. Molotov informed us that Stalin was ill that day. He had
instructed Mr. Molotov to discuss with us the immediate cause of the
Soviet Union¡¯s entry into the war. The Soviet Government, Molotov said,
considered that the best method would be for the United States, Great
Britain, and the other Allies to address a formal request to the Soviet
Government for its entry into the war. He added that the Soviet Government
was assuming, of course, that the agreement with the Chinese Government
would be signed before his country entered the war.
The request presented a problem to us. The Soviet Union had a nonaggression
pact with the Japanese. The Soviet Government also had had
a similar pact with Hitler, but it was the Nazis who had violated that one.
We did not believe the United States Government should be placed in the
position of asking another government to violate its agreement without
good and sufficient reason. The Soviet Union had notified Japan a few
months earlier of its intention to abrogate the treaty but it would still be
in force for nearly a year. The President was disturbed.
As for myself, I must frankly admit that in view of what we knew of
Soviet actions in eastern Germany and the violations of the Yalta agreements
in Poland, Rumania and Bulgaria, I would have been satisfied had
the Russians determined not to enter the war. Notwithstanding Japan¡¯s
persistent refusal to surrender unconditionally, I believed the atomic
bomb would be successful and would force the Japanese to accept surrender
on our terms. I feared what would happen when the Red Army entered
Manchuria. Before it left Manchuria, my fears were realized.
When the agreement on Russian participation in the war was reached
at Yalta, the military situation had been entirely different. President
Roosevelt and our military leaders wanted the Soviet Union in the war.
No one of them could have anticipated the difficulties we encountered
after Yalta. However, an agreement had been made and we had to stand
by our obligation.
Ben Cohen and I spent hours trying to decide how the President could
properly reply to the Soviet request. It was Ben who suggested that we
call the Soviet Government¡¯s attention to its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations.
The President approved the idea. It was late at night. The staff had
gone. With Ben¡¯s suggestion as a starter I went to a typewriter and
drafted the letter which the President later approved.
It first mentioned the Moscow Declaration of October 30, 1943, signed
by the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and China.
That declaration provided that ¡°for the purpose of maintaining international
peace and security pending the re-establishment of law and order
and the inauguration of a system of general security, they will consult with
one another and as occasion requires with other members of the United
Nations with a view to joint action on behalf of the community of nations.¡±
The letter then pointed out that Article 106 of the proposed United
Nations Charter provided that the four powers would continue to act on
the basis of the Moscow Declaration until the Charter came into force. It
then cited Article 103 of the Charter, providing that ¡°in the event of a
conflict between the obligations of the Members of the United Nations
under the present Charter and their obligations under any other international
agreement, their obligations under the present Charter shall prevail.¡±
The President¡¯s letter then concluded:
¡°Though the Charter has not been formally ratified, at San Francisco,
it was agreed to by the Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the Soviet Government will be one of the permanent members
of the Security Council.
 ¡°It seems to me that under the terms of the Moscow Declaration and
the provisions of the Charter, above referred to, it would be proper for the
Soviet Union to indicate its willingness to consult and co-operate with
other great powers now at war with Japan with a view to joint action on
behalf of the community of nations to maintain peace and security.¡±
The President later told me that Generalissimo Stalin expressed great
appreciation of the communication. He should have. The Soviet Government¡¯s
statement announcing its entry into the war did not include a reference
to Section 103 of the Charter, but our finding it for Mr. Molotov
will enable the Soviet historian to show that Russia¡¯s declaration of war
on Japan was in accordance with what they like to claim is their scrupulous
regard for international obligations.
We arrived back in Washington the afternoon of August 7. The day
before, we had received word aboard ship that the first atomic bomb had
been dropped on Hiroshima. The day after our return, Nagasaki received
its atomic blast and the Soviet Union declared war on Japan, to be effective
August 9. In the early morning hours of August 10, we received,
through the Swiss Government, a message from the Japanese that they
were ready to accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration ¡°with the understanding
that the said Declaration does not comprise any demand
which prejudices the prerogatives of His Majesty as a Sovereign Ruler.¡±
The message had come in during the night, but the President and I
were not called until early morning. I immediately rushed to the White
House where the Secretaries of War and Navy soon gathered. Admiral
Leahy urged that the Japanese offer be accepted promptly. I told the
President I would like a little time to think about a reply to the message.
¡°I do not see why we should retreat from our demand for unconditional
surrender,¡± I said. ¡°That demand was presented to Japan before the use
of the bomb and before the Soviet Union was a belligerent. If any conditions
are to be accepted, I want the United States and not Japan to state
the conditions.¡±
The President agreed with me, and asked me to draft a reply.
In my office I drafted a reply, which the President approved when I
presented it to him an hour later. About noon Secretary Stimson telephoned
to say he had seen the draft and highly approved of the message. It
stated :
From the moment of surrender, the authority of the Emperor and
the Japanese Government to rule the state shall be subject to the Supreme
Commander of the Allied powers who will take such steps as
he deems proper to effectuate the surrender terms.
The Emperor will be required to authorize and ensure the signature
by the Government of Japan and the Japanese Imperial General
Headquarters of the surrender terms necessary to carry out the
provisions of the Potsdam Declaration, and shall issue his commands
to all the Japanese military, naval and air authorities and to
all the forces under their control wherever located to cease active operations
and to surrender their arms, and to issue such other orders
as the Supreme Commander may require to give effect to the surrender
terms. . . .
The ultimate form of government of Japan shall, in accordance with
the Potsdam Declaration, be established by the freely expressed will
of the people.
The message was sent on August 11, and we waited tensely for a response.
I was confident the Japanese would accept, but the feeling of
responsibility for thousands of lives was inescapable. I telephoned our Minister
in Switzerland, Mr. Leland Harrison, and asked him to call me as
soon as he received a Japanese reply and say whether or not the Japanese
accepted unconditional surrender. I wanted to eliminate the hours a coded
cable would consume.
A few minutes after 4 o¡¯clock on August 14, I got the telephone call;
it ended the longest wait I have ever experienced. As soon as Mr. Harrison
had read me the contents of the Japanese note, I asked the War
Department to set up a radio circuit with London, Moscow and Chungking
and then rushed out to the Pentagon Building to carry on a teletype
conversation with the Foreign Ministers in these three capitals. I informed
each one of Harrison¡¯s message, said we regarded the Japanese
reply as a complete acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration, and suggested
a time for simultaneous release of the news. The teletype clicked off so
many different replies I realized it would be impossible to reconcile them
quickly.
On the other hand, I did not believe this happy news should be withheld
from the people of the world because of an argument on the time of release.
So I ended the discussion by stating that at 7:00 p.m., Eastern
War Time, the hour that seemed most suitable, President Truman would
announce the surrender, and invited the other governments to do likewise.
By 5 130 I had reported the conversation to the President and received
his approval for the arrangements. At 6:00, the Charge d¡¯Affaires
of the Swiss Legation, Mr. Max Grassli, arrived at my office with the
Japanese message read to me over the transatlantic telephone. An hour
later President Truman announced the end of the world¡¯s most horrible
conflict.
Some day the complete story will be written of the events in Japan
preceding the surrender. From the interrogation of high-ranking officials
and from the documents that came into the possession of our authorities,
it is evident that five weeks before the surrender Japan had no idea of
Stalin¡¯s intentions. In fact, the Japanese were no more certain of the
Soviet Union¡¯s entry into the war than the Soviets had been of Hitler¡¯s
intentions five weeks before he invaded Russia. Nor were they any more
certain than we had been of Japanese intentions five weeks before Pearl
Harbor.
Not until July 6, 1945, when China¡¯s Foreign Minister, T. V. Soong,
was in Moscow, did the Japanese become suspicious of Soviet intentions.
At that time, Foreign Minister Togo said, ¡°Soong, we know to have been
received well by the Russians and to have conferred with Stalin.. .. This
may result in some sort of treaty.¡± And he added with evident surprise,
¡°It is even reported in some quarters that the Soviet Union would soon
enter the war against Japan.¡± This would indicate that, even then, the
Japanese intelligence was not very efficient.
It is evident that at the time Ambassador Sato, the Japanese envoy in
Moscow, presented Japan¡¯s mediation request to Mr. Molotov, the Emperor
already had concluded that their cause was hopeless. His advisers,
however, apparently believed they could avoid the Emperor¡¯s removal
and also save some of their conquered territory.
Also clear, from his messages to the Japanese Foreign Office, is the
fact that Ambassador Sato in Moscow was a realist and a courageous
representative. He advised the Japanese Government that the message
sent to him was so general in character the Soviets would not consider
it; that they would not be convinced by pretty phrases having no
reality and that, unless Japan was ready to surrender, there was no use
wasting time sounding out the views of the Soviet Government.
Ambassador Sato told his Foreign Office that the Soviets had insisted
upon the unconditional surrender of Germany and certainly would join
the Americans and British in insisting upon the unconditional surrender
of Japan. He said he knew his views were not in accord with the communications
from His Majesty and even though ¡°my offense is great,¡±
nevertheless ¡°I want to preserve the lives of hundreds of thousands of
people who are about to go to their death needlessly.¡± And he stressed
that ¡°Japan has no choice but to accept unconditional surrender.¡±
Had the Japanese Government listened to Sato and surrendered unconditionally,
it would not have been necessary to drop the atomic bomb.
But his advice was ignored as the militarists clamored for a negotiated
peace. On July 21 the Japanese Government advised its representative
in Moscow:
We cannot consent to unconditional surrender under any circumstances.
Even if the war drags on and more blood must be shed, so
long as the enemy demands unconditional surrender, we will fight as
one man against the enemy in accordance with the Emperor¡¯s command.
The Japanese Government communicated with the Soviets instead of
Sweden or Switzerland in order to advise the Russians that they were
prepared to meet fully their demands in the Far East. They hoped, by
granting Soviet demands, to secure Soviet aid in negotiations. They also
hoped, by such discussions, to find out definitely whether the Soviets were
going to enter the war.
The Japanese Cabinet did not decide to surrender until the atomic
bomb had been dropped on Hiroshima.
The records of the Japanese Foreign Office show that on August io
the Soviet Ambassador to Tokyo presented Togo a message stating the
Soviet¡¯s endorsement of the Potsdam Declaration and the existence of a
state of war with Japan. In return, the Foreign Minister handed the
Soviet Ambassador, for transmission to his government, a copy of the
message sent that morning through Switzerland, announcing Japan¡¯s willingness
to surrender upon condition that we made no demand prejudicing
the prerogatives of His Majesty as a sovereign ruler. This was the message
I answered on the eleventh which resulted in the surrender on the
fourteenth.
The Japanese surrender had come earlier than we expected, but it did
not find us unprepared. A co-ordinating committee, composed of representatives
from the State, War and Navy departments had been at work
for some time preparing general orders to govern the surrender and the
occupation. One crisis, however, immediately confronted us: Who should
have the honor of accepting the surrender of the Japanese?
The Great Powers had agreed that General MacArthur should act as
their representative as well as ours in accepting the surrender. But officers
of the Navy soon registered their keen disappointment at this arrangement.
Secretary Forrestal presented their arguments: The war in the
Pacific had been their show primarily; the bluejackets and Marines had
advanced island by island from Pearl Harbor to Tokyo; they had destroyed
the Japanese Navy. Therefore, MacArthur could sign for the Allies
but Admiral Nimitz should sign for the United States. My service
in the Senate as chairman of the Committee on Naval Appropriations
may have influenced my view, but I responded sympathetically to Mr.
Forrestal¡¯s arguments; I wanted the Navy in the picture. Arrangements
had already been made, but I promised Forrestal I would try to think of
a way by which Admiral Nimitz could take part in the signing along with
General MacArthur.
When Secretary Forrestal is really interested in a cause, he doesn¡¯t
sleep, and he doesn¡¯t let others sleep. That night the telephone awakened
me. It was Secretary Forrestal, suggesting that the surrender ceremonies
take place on board the battleship USS Missouri. I was sufficiently awake
to recognize what the Army would call a ¡°Navy trick.¡± Had he said simply,
¡°a battleship,¡± it would have remained a debatable question, but when
he named the Missouri, I knew the case was closed. The President, upon
receiving the suggestion, of course, thought it an excellent idea. Thus was
averted a great crisis in army-navy relations.
The people of the Soviet Union, however, may not know of Forrestal¡¯s
victory. After the Christmas Eve dinner that Generalissimo Stalin gave
during our meeting in Moscow in December 1945, a moving picture of
the Soviet Army entering Manchuria was shown to us. It pictured Japan¡¯s
preparation for war as being directed only against Russia; the tumultuous
reception given the Red Army by the people of Manchuria and, finally,
the signing of the terms of surrender. According to the film, the principal
participants in the surrender ceremonies were representatives of Japan
and the Soviet Union. The Supreme Commander, General MacArthur,
was in the background. The scene was described as ¡°signing the surrender
terms¡± on ¡°a battleship.¡± There was no statement that the battleship
was the Missouri or even that it was a United States¡¯ ship. The entire
scene might well impress many Russians as the ending, on a Soviet battleship,
of a private war between Russia and Japan. It showed me that
the Soviets are keenly aware of the effectiveness of propaganda through
moving pictures. I was not surprised to learn that the Soviet Government
is now promoting the exhibition of Soviet films in European
countries.
While we had borne the major burden in crushing the military power
of Japan, we had always regarded the war as one war against the Axis,
and we intended that the occupation of Japan should be an Allied responsibility.
As early as August 22, we invited the Soviet Union, Great
Britain and China to join us in setting up a ten-power advisory commission
to carry out the aims of the Potsdam Declaration and the surrender
terms. The Soviet Union and China promptly accepted, but Great Britain
objected because the commission would have only advisory powers. Australia
and New Zealand wanted more decisive roles. Consequently, the
establishment of a commission was delayed.
As soon as the Council of Foreign Ministers met in London in September,
I began talks with Mr. Bevin in an effort to settle our differences.
But before we had progressed very far a new element was injected into
the situation. Mr. Molotov came to see me, on instructions from Moscow.
He wanted to complain of the way in which the surrender terms were
being carried out. He complained particularly about the way the Japanese
Army was being demobilized. It was dangerous, he said, merely to disarm
the Japanese and send them home; they should be held as prisoners
of war. We should do what the Red Army was doing with the Japanese
it had taken in Manchuria?make them work.
I pointed out to him that the Potsdam Declaration, to which the Soviet
Union had adhered, pledged that ¡°Japanese military forces, after being
completely disarmed, shall be permitted to return to their homes with the
opportunity to lead peaceful and productive lives.¡± I assured him that we
would hold all those suspected of war crimes but said that we would not
hold prisoners to work for us.
No one can say accurately how many Japanese prisoners have been
taken to the Soviet Union. In mid-1947, the best guess was that approximately
500,000 were still there. Transportation difficulties delayed the
return of many of our Japanese prisoners, but they have been returned.
As long as we were holding either Japanese or Germans, we could not
very well insist that our Allies comply with the Geneva Convention
on Prisoners of War and the clearer promises of the Potsdam Declaration.
I have described in an earlier chapter our efforts in returning
the Germans. The positive statements concerning prisoners in the Potsdam
Declaration make the use of Japanese as slave laborers even less excusable.
The time has come when the United States should demand that
its Allies comply with the Potsdam Declaration.
At London, however, when Mr. Molotov said that Japanese should be
made prisoners, he even expressed the fear that our policy would lead
to a revival of Japanese aggression. Assistant Secretary Dunn pointed
out to him that our proposal to set up a Far Eastern Commission would
give his government an opportunity to express its views on Japanese
policy, including the disarmament of prisoners. I said that I thought we
should have a demilitarization treaty for Japan similar to the German
Treaty. I assured him that, when I returned home, I would discuss it
with President Truman.
Despite our assurances, Mr. Molotov two days later opened the session
of the council by reading a prepared statement in which he suggested the
establishment of an Allied Control Council for Japan. The council would
be composed of the United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union and
China, with the American representative acting as chairman. The council
would have far-reaching powers, much greater than those Mr. Bevin
had suggested. Through two long meetings, I argued against including
on the agenda the subject of establishing a Control Council in Japan. The
other members, on the whole, supported me, for they were eager to proceed
with the European treaties, and at the time Mr. Molotov¡¯s request
appeared to be just another phase of his campaign for delay.
On September 26, at my request, Mr. Bevin, Mr. Molotov and I met
in an effort to solve our differences on the right of Prance and China to
participate in all the discussions of the council. But Mr. Molotov immediately
reverted to the Soviet proposal for the establishment of a Control
Council in Japan. The policies being pursued by General MacArthur
made him wonder, he said, whether it was ¡°useful for the Soviet Government
to continue having a representative in Tokyo.¡± I repeated that I was
not prepared at this session of the council, called to begin work on the
European treaties, to discuss the Japanese question. I again assured him
that I would go into the matter thoroughly as soon as I returned home,
and would communicate with him.
The Soviet delegation, he said, was unable to understand why it was
impossible to discuss this question during the present meeting, and he
wished to ask whether or not the one or two billion dollars of gold which
the Americans had found in Japan, according to newspaper reports, had
anything to do with this situation.
Had the Foreign Minister of Great Britain, France or China made such
a statement, one would have known that it was deliberately intended to
be insulting. But, from the way in which it was expressed and particularly
in the light of Soviet actions elsewhere, I concluded Mr. Molotov did not
intend it as an insult.
Mr. Molotov had admitted at Potsdam that the Bed Army had indulged
in large-scale removals of property and had suggested that one
billion dollars be deducted from his reparations claims to cover them.
Notwithstanding the embarrassment he seemed to feel about this at Potsdam,
the Red Army repeated a few weeks later in Manchuria its performance
in Germany. Soviet troops removed from the soil of their Chinese
Allies everything they could carry away. It was therefore quite understandable
that when Mr. Molotov read the story, later proved to be untrue,
that our soldiers had found two billion dollars in gold, he should
expect us to do just what the Red Army would do under similar circumstances?
remove the gold and refuse to talk about Japanese affairs until
the wealth was safely hidden in the United States.
In London, I tried once again, in a private conversation with Mr. Molotov,
to persuade him that the establishment of the Far Eastern Advisory
Commission was logically the first step in considering how the occupation
of Japan was to be directed. But my efforts met with no success.
Meanwhile, I had been urging Mr. Bevin to agree to our proposal, submitted
on August 22, for the creation of the Far Eastern Advisory Commission.
I agreed informally that when the commission met, we would
support a proposal that it should be authorized to meet in Tokyo as well
as in Washington and that India should be made a member. The Cabinet
then authorized Mr. Bevin to accept our proposal. With Britain¡¯s approval
obtained, I hoped Molotov would withdraw his new proposal and
revert to his earlier approval of our August 22 proposal. I immediately
wrote him a letter stating that, since the four powers now were agreed,
a meeting of the commission would be held on October 30, and I hoped
a Soviet representative would be there. He replied that the situation had
changed since the Soviet Union had agreed to our August 22 proposal and
that his government now asked for the establishment of a Control Council.
As I left for Washington, it still was uncertain whether a representative
of the Soviet Union would be on hand for the commission¡¯s first meeting.
This situation was a part of the whole state of our relations with the
Soviet Union which deeply disturbed me during October 1945.1 felt that
as long as we continued to communicate with each other concerning our
problems, they might be reconciled. But during those weeks there was
no communication.
I thought it wise to give the Soviets the benefit of every doubt, since
we wanted to progress in the task of peace making. Therefore, we prepared
a modification of our proposal for a peace conference on the European
treaties?the issue we thought was mainly responsible for the deadlock
of the London session of the council. I wanted this proposal to get
to Stalin, who was then on vacation. A message to the head of a government
must be signed by the President, so we drafted a letter and asked
the President to have Ambassador Harriman deliver it for him personally.
The President made the letter a most cordial one.
On October 25, Ambassador Harriman called on Stalin at Gagri. After
he had read the President¡¯s letter, which had been translated into Russian,
Stalin looked up and said, ¡°The Japanese question is not touched upon.¡±
When this message came in from Harriman, I immediately realized
that we had miscalculated at London. We had thought it was the peace
conference issue that was behind Molotov¡¯s obstructive tactics. Stalin¡¯s
question made us realize that they were more angry about Japan.
Harriman was equally surprised, but fortunately he had been with us
in London and was able to explain our August 22 proposal in detail to
Stalin. He made it clear he was not authorized to negotiate regarding
Japan. He added he knew I was most anxious to devise a method of informing
and consulting with the Soviet Government and our other Allies on
Japanese policy, provided that, if there was disagreement, the United
States would not be interfered with in carrying out the occupation policy.
Although Harriman was able to steer the conversation back to the
question of the peace conference, Japan remained uppermost in Stalin¡¯s
mind. He opened the second day of his talks with our Ambassador by returning
to the subject.
He was unwilling, he said, to send a representative to the forthcoming
meeting of the Far Eastern Advisory Commission because, as Molotov
had stated in London, the situation had changed since our invitation had
been accepted. Stalin had, in fact, recalled his representative in Tokyo,
Lieutenant General Derevyanko, because, he claimed, the general was
neither informed nor consulted and, under such circumstances, could not
accept responsibility for actions taken by General MacArthur in the name
of the Allies.
The Soviet Union, Stalin declared, was being treated as a satellite state
and not as an Ally, and this did not become the dignity of his nation. He
complained that the Japanese press and radio had been allowed to vilify
the Soviet Union; that changes in the government had been made without
informing or consulting him; and that Japanese banks had been closed
without any information being issued on the disposition of their assets.
Ambassador Harriman explained that General MacArthur was carrying
out the surrender terms agreed to by the Soviet Government and that
all assets were being held for eventual disposition by the Allies. He pointed
out that, even before the surrender terms had been signed, we had proposed
the establishment of the Advisory Commission to consider just such
matters as the Generalissimo was mentioning, and he urged that a Soviet
representative be sent to the forthcoming meeting in Washington where
he could get the information his government wanted.
Stalin was not satisfied. He said his representative in Tokyo had been
treated ¡°like a piece of furniture¡± and he feared further differences would
arise if he sent a representative to the Washington meeting. If the United
States wished to come to an agreement with the Soviet Union, he insisted,
it could only be done properly in negotiations between our two governments.
He called attention to the fact that Russia had maintained thirty
to forty divisions on the Manchurian border throughout the war, had
engaged the Japanese with seventy divisions and had been ready, if their
offer had been accepted, to assist in the occupation of Japan.
Because this statement undoubtedly will be heard frequently in the discussion
of the Japanese peace treaty, it should be recorded that while
Generalissimo Stalin¡¯s statement was correct, it is also true that Japan¡¯s
thirty or forty divisions on the Manchurian border did not seriously affect
the Japanese war effort. As a result of the successful operations of the
United States Navy, the Japanese early in the war lacked the ships
necessary to move men and supplies to the battlefields of the Pacific. With
their forces immobilized, it was just as easy for the Japanese to maintain
their divisions on the Manchurian border as elsewhere. Conceivably, the
Japanese could have used these forces for land operations in China, but
we know now that this would not have materially affected the final outcome
of the war.
We had barely received Harriman¡¯s report on his conversations when
the Far Eastern Advisory Commission gathered for its first meeting, and
elected Major General Frank R. McCoy, the United States representative,
as chairman. It then adjourned for a week to give the Soviet Union another
chance to send a representative.
The fact is, the commission was unable to operate effectively from the
very outset. Although the United Kingdom and Australia were willing to
co-operate with us, they were not satisfied with a purely advisory role.
I soon realized we must try to work out an arrangement which, while
protecting General MacArthur from undue interference, would nevertheless
meet the desire of our Allies for more extensive participation.
Many conferences and long debates took place before we finally agreed
upon a draft proposal for a Far Eastern Commission and an Allied Council.
This proposal was approved by the President, and I presented it at
the first meeting of the three Foreign Ministers in Moscow on December
16. Discussion of our proposal extended through six meetings. The chief
issues were Mr. Molotov¡¯s opposition to making India a member of the
commission, his desire to insert the word ¡°Control¡± in the name of the
Allied Council, Mr. Bevin¡¯s request to include Australia on the council
and, finally, the voting procedure in the commission.
For a while I feared that agreement would be delayed so long that it
would be impossible to obtain China¡¯s concurrence before we adjourned.
But on December 24, Mr. Molotov announced his willingness to admit
India to the commission. It was agreed that the commission would act
upon majority votes of the eleven members, including the votes of the
United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, China and the United States. Mr.
Bevin likewise accepted a suggestion that on the four-member Allied
Council in Tokyo, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and
India should have one representative in common.
The new Far Eastern Commission began functioning in Washington
on February 26,1946. It has authority to decide upon the principles which
control the administration of Japan, and its decisions are put into directives
issued to the Supreme Allied Commander by the United States
Government. This means, of course, that no basic policy may be adopted
without our concurrence, and, pending agreement in the commission, we
are free to give interim directives on all urgent matters.
Only three questions were excepted from this authority. These three
questions, on which the commission must decide by a majority vote which
includes ours, are: (a) changes in the control system as set forth in the
surrender terms, (&) fundamental changes in the Japanese constitutional
structure, and (c) changes in the government as a whole as distinguished
from shifts involving individual officials. It has not been our policy to
dictate wholesale alterations in the government, and the authority of
General MacArthur to make individual changes or fill vacancies has been
unimpaired.
The council continues to advise and consult with the Supreme Commander
in Tokyo. At the time the commission and the council were established,
I stated that the authority of General MacArthur should not
be obstructed by the inability of the commission to agree on policy or of
the council to agree on advice for carrying out that policy. Nearly two
rears have passed and events have proved that the two bodies have not
interfered with MacArthur¡¯s administration. He and his staff have continued to carry out their difficult task with an efficiency that has won the
plaudits of the people in other Allied nations besides the United States.
There were other Japanese questions on Mr. Molotov¡¯s mind at Moscow.
He asked first about plans for disposing of the Japanese Navy and,
secondly, about the Japanese islands. Two months before the Moscow
meeting, we had proposed that what was left of the Japanese Navy should
be scuttled. Britain and China had agreed, but Mr. Molotov had replied
that his government wanted one-fourth of all surface vessels from destroyers
on through the lesser tonnages. He also had asked about the
merchant fleet. Secretary Forrestal had said the naval vessels requested
had little practical value and, with his approval, we had agreed rather
than argue the point with Mr. Molotov. The merchant fleet, I told Mr.
Molotov, was being used to repatriate Japanese, and we believed it should
ultimately be considered in connection with the reparations settlement.
I don¡¯t know why Mr. Molotov felt it necessary to raise the issue again
in the Council unless he wanted me to restate our position before the
other Foreign Ministers. Apparently, he did not know that I had sent
them the same message I had sent him. His other motive may have been
to create an opportunity to submit a claim for a part of the Japanese fishing
fleet. Mr. Bevin quickly pointed out that the fishing fleet was essential
to maintain Japan¡¯s food supply. Even though the Japanese were defeated,
he said, ¡°It is necessary for them to go on living somehow.¡± v
Mr. Molotov then turned to the question of the Japanese mandated
islands.
The United States, I replied, had not yet formulated its views and I
knew of no agreements concerning Japanese islands in the Pacific except
two: (a) the declaration at Cairo in November 1943 that Japan should
be required to surrender territories acquired by conquest, and (b) the
Yalta agreement regarding South Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands. The
last of these I had learned about only some weeks after becoming Secretary.
Mr. Bevin said the British Cabinet had not known of the Yalta
agreement until some time after it was made, nevertheless they had no
intention of going back on it.
After the Moscow meeting and through most of 1946 we studied actively
the question of what should be done with the islands entrusted to
Japanese care by the League of Nations. Shortly before the meeting of
the Council of Foreign Ministers in New York in November, the President
held a meeting of the Secretaries of State, War and Navy to determine
our policy.
The State and War departments felt that, since Japan had received
these islands under a mandate from the League of Nations, our rights
were not superior to those delegated by the League and that therefore,
if possible, the United Nations should declare them a strategic area to be
administered by us under a United Nations trusteeship agreement. We
pointed out that at San Francisco the United States delegation, by direction
of President Roosevelt, had been a strong advocate of the trusteeship
system. We argued that we could not properly adopt a policy that would
show a lack of confidence in the system we had urged upon the United
Nations. Japan had violated her mandate and therefore we could seek a
decision from the United Nations on these mandated islands, while those
islands that belonged to the Japanese, such as the Ryukyus, would have
to await disposition by the peace conference.
The Secretary of the Navy was very reasonable. He did not want us
to do anything that would show lack of confidence in the United Nations,
but because he felt keenly the loss of life these islands had cost us, he
wanted to make certain that the terms of the arrangement would permit
the Navy to maintain adequate bases. He expressed fear that once negotiations
were under way, subordinate officials of the State Department or
some delegate to the United Nations might compromise and accept an
arrangement that would jeopardize the proper maintenance of the bases.
When I assured him that no changes in the United States proposal would
be accepted without the approval of the President or the Secretary of
State, he said he was satisfied with the trusteeship proposal. Shortly
thereafter, our able representative to the United Nations, Mr. Warren
R. Austin, placed our proposal before the Security Council.
The United Nations General Assembly was in session during the meeting
of the Council of Foreign Ministers in New York, and some of the
pending trusteeship proposals were up for approval, in the hope that the
United Nations Trusteeship Council could be established.
The Charter provides that each trusteeship agreement must be accept
able to the ¡°states directly concerned.¡± I held that while the trusteeship
agreement for strategic areas had to be approved by the Security Council,
the United States, as the country in possession of the mandated islands,
was the only state ¡°directly concerned.¡± Mr. Dulles, who was our representative
on the Trusteeship Committee in the General Assembly, had
taken the position that the definition of ¡°states directly concerned¡± should
not be determined until the Trusteeship Council was established but he
had been strongly opposed by the Soviet representative, Ambassador Nikolai
V. Novikov.
Mr. Molotov asked me to agree that the five permanent members of
the Security Council should be regarded as ¡°states directly concerned¡±
in all cases. He suggested that the five powers exchange letters confirming
this understanding. The Soviet Union probably would have
no objection to the United States¡¯ proposal for a strategic trusteeship over
the Japanese mandated islands, he said; nevertheless his government
would like to have an agreement that all trusteeship proposals must have
the approval of the five permanent members. If this were done, he added,
two or three trusteeship agreements could be approved at that session
of the General Assembly so that the Trusteeship Council could be organized.
Such a definition of ¡°states directly concerned,¡± I replied, was a matter
of Charter interpretation within the United Nations itself, and should not
be the subject of a bilateral arrangement between our two governments.
I then added that I would bear his position in mind when considering the
ultimate disposition of the Kurile Islands and the southern half of Sakhalin.
This brought a very quick response. The Soviet Union, he said, did
not contemplate a trusteeship arrangement for the Kuriles or Sakhalin;
these matters had been settled at Yalta. I pointed out to him that Mr.
Roosevelt had said repeatedly at Yalta that territory could be ceded only
at the peace conference and he had agreed only to support the Soviet
Union¡¯s claim at the conference. While it could be assumed that we would
stand by Mr. Roosevelt¡¯s promise, I continued, we certainly would want
to know, by the time of the peace conference, what the Soviet Union¡¯s attitude
would be toward our proposal for placing the Japanese-mandated
islands under our trusteeship. Mr. Molotov quickly grasped the implications
of this remark. When the United States trusteeship agreement was
voted upon later by the Security Council, I was delighted, but not surprised,
to see that the Soviet representative voted in favor of our proposal.
The other Far Eastern territorial question that figured prominently in
our discussions at Moscow was Korea.
The United States, United Kingdom and China had agreed at Cairo
on December i, 1943, that ¡°in due course Korea shall become free and independent.¡±
At Yalta, President Roosevelt and Generalissimo Stalin had
agreed informally that Korea should win its independence and that if a
transition period were necessary, a trusteeship should be established. For
forty years Korea had been exploited by Japan. The Japanese had permitted
relatively few Koreans to secure an education and had made it
difficult for them to obtain the important positions in trade and industry
that would have given them administrative experience. As a result, there
was some question whether the people were sufficiently trained to assume
the responsibilities of government immediately. The desire to help the
Koreans develop the skills and experience that would enable them to
maintain their independence was the inspiration for President Roosevelt¡¯s
acquiescence in the trusteeship idea.
When we went to Moscow we were troubled by the fact that Korea
had, in fact, been split in two. At the time of the Japanese surrender, the
military leaders agreed that all Japanese troops north of the 38th parallel
would surrender to the Red Army and all troops south of that line would
surrender to our Army. This arrangement was accepted by the Soviet
Union and was included in Order No. I issued to General MacArthur.
But what was intended as a division for military convenience has become
a closed boundary between the Soviet and American zones of occupation.
Our delegation therefore submitted a paper to the conference proposing
the establishment of a Joint Soviet-American Commission to unify the
administration of such matters as currency, trade and transportation, telecommunications,
electric power distribution, coastal shipping, and so on.
It also proposed that a four-power trusteeship be established which would
¡°endure for no longer period than necessary to allow the Koreans to form
an independent, representative and effective government.¡±
A few days later, Mr. Molotov submitted a Soviet proposal for a Joint
Commission on urgent problems of economic unification, the establishment
of a provisional government and a four-power trusteeship to last
for five years. In the interest of promoting agreement, we accepted the
Soviet draft with a few amendments and it was included in the Moscow
protocol.
But ¡°trusteeship¡± to the Koreans meant only a continuation of outside
control, which under the Japanese had brought them much suffering, and
the postponement of their long-sought independence. The complaints
against the Trusteeship proposal prompted me to issue a statement saying:
¡°The joint Soviet-American Commission, working with the Korean
provisional democratic government, may find it possible to dispense with
a trusteeship. It is our goal to hasten the day when Korea will become an
independent member of the society of nations.¡±
This hope, unfortunately, has not been sustained by subsequent events.
The Soviet-American Commission met in January 1946 to carry out the
mandate of the Moscow agreement. But what seemed to us unequivocal
language, once again, apparently, was different in Russian. To us it
seemed clear that the country should be considered as an economic and
administrative whole. The Soviet commander, however, saw the problem
as one of arranging exchanges between and the co-ordination of two entirely
separate zones. Today, a year and a half later, they are still separate
zones, and-progress toward setting up a provisional government has been
equally disappointing.
The Soviet representative has insisted that only those political parties
which had not opposed the idea of trusteeship should be consulted in
forming a government. But most Koreans, with the exception of the
Communists, had opposed it. The United States maintained that, in
accordance with the doctrine of free speech, an expression of opposition
should not keep anyone from being consulted. We insisted on meeting
with representatives of all political parties; as a result, the commission
adjourned in a deadlock in May 1946. In the spring of 1947, at Moscow,
Secretary Marshall succeeded in arranging for the Joint Commission to
TOWARD PEACE IN ASIA 223
resume negotiations, but these have as yet produced no concrete results.
In the United States zone, Koreans rapidly are replacing Americans in
administrative positions. An interim legislative assembly composed of
forty-five elected members and forty-five appointed members met for the
first time in December 1946. The purpose was not to encourage a movement
for separate governments in Korea but to prepare the Koreans for
responsibilities of self-government.
Whenever a provisional government is established, I fully expect the
Soviet Union will propose that the Soviet-American Commission be withdrawn
and that the proposed period of trusteeship be eliminated. This
latter proposal, particularly, will be popular with the Koreans. But the
Soviet Union may have another purpose in mind. In the Soviet Zone,
the Red Army has trained an army of Koreans estimated to number from
100,000 to 400,000 men. The withdrawal of the Joint Commission and
Soviet-American occupation forces would leave the Soviet-trained army
the only effective military force in Korea. Undoubtedly, this army would
attempt to take charge of whatever government then existed. Therefore,
as a condition to withdrawal of the commission, we must require that this
army be disbanded.
Korea does not need an armed force trained either by Russians or by
Americans. What it needs is economic assistance. The fertilizer plants in
the Soviet zone were converted by the Japanese to the manufacture of
explosives. The Soviet commander has refused the American zone adequate
shipments of fertilizer. Consequently, fertilizer will have to be imported
in the immediate future if the depleted soil of the southern zone
is to be productive.
Korea¡¯s industrial plants need rehabilitation. This requires coal, raw
materials, and replacement parts. If the Joint Commission remains for two
or possibly three years and American representatives can supervise financial
assistance, the United States might furnish the help that is needed
to set Korea¡¯s industrial machinery in motion.
The United States and the Soviet Union are committed to the establishment
of a unified, independent and democratic Korea. Our government
must continue its interest until that promise is fulfilled and Korea is able
to take its place as a sovereign equal in the family of the United Nations.
This is one of the important steps toward lasting peace in Asia.
Another essential step is to conclude an early peace treaty with Japan.
Nearly two years of occupation experience have given us sound basis
for judgment. Under the policies administered by General MacArthur
great progress has been made. The time has come when we should agree
upon the terms of the peace treaty so the people of Japan may know what
the future holds for them and may begin the work of rehabilitation, guided
by the blueprint provided by the Allied nations.
For reasons I have given in connection with Germany, I do not think
the Council of Foreign Ministers should prepare the preliminary draft of
the Japanese treaty. The Soviet Union, which entered the war a few hours
before the first offer of surrender, should not insist upon peace machinery
which gives them the power of veto. On the other hand, it is quite understandable
that a government like Australia, whose armed forces fought
the Japanese from Pearl Harbor to the day of surrender, feels that it
should play a larger role in the Japanese peace settlement than it had in the
drafting of the five European treaties.
We should immediately announce that we believe a peace conference
should be held, and an early date. The eleven governments on the commission
are those that made substantial military contributions in the war
against Japan and are the ones that should prepare the preliminary draft
of the peace treaty. Through their work on the commission, all eleven
have been giving careful consideration to Japanese problems for nearly
two years. They should be able, without difficulty, to prepare drafts of a
treaty for consideration by the peace conference.
The peace conference should include all the states at war with Japan.
Decisions of the drafting powers and of the peace conference should
be by a two-thirds vote, including two-thirds or seven out of eleven powers
that made substantial military contributions. Every effort should be
made to secure unanimity, but a two-thirds vote should be decisive and a
treaty based on such decisions should be submitted to the governments
for signature. The veto power, of course, cannot be entirely eliminated
since there is no way in which an Allied nation that is a member of the
peace conference can be forced to sign a treaty. But it cannot prevent
others from signing it.
The governments unwilling to accept the decision of a two-thirds majority
would remain in a technical state of war with Japan. I believe, however,
that the treaty with Japan, like those with Italy and the Balkan
states, should provide that any government refusing to sign it will not
receive any of the benefits of its provisions.
In adopting the procedure recommended here we would, of course,
be giving up our right to veto any provision with which we disagree. This
would be a magnanimous gesture on the part of the country which was
largely responsible for defeating the Japanese. It also would be an expression
of confidence in our Allies and in our ability to reach, by a two-thirds
vote, satisfactory agreements on the treatment of Japan.
In drafting the peace treaty there should be no serious controversy on
territorial questions. The United States undoubtedly will stand by President
Roosevelt¡¯s agreement on the Kuriles and Sakhalin. I see no objection
to Japan¡¯s keeping the islands of the Ryukyu group north of Okinawa. From Okinawa south, it is my hope that the islands will be placed
under a United Nations trusteeship. For sentimental reasons, the United
States will want a trusteeship interest in Okinawa.
The question of reparations is certain to be most controversial. The Far
Eastern Commission¡¯s discussions on this subject have been marked by
the Soviet representative¡¯s insistence that the industrial equipment removed
from Manchuria must be excluded from any reparations settlement.
These removals, the Soviets insist, must be regarded as ¡°war
booty.¡± One Soviet representative has placed an estimated value on these
removals of 97 million dollars. Reparations Commissioner Pauley, on the
basis of his investigation in June 1946, has placed direct damage at more
than 858 million dollars and the total damage, including deterioration and
cost of replacement, at over two billion dollars.
The Soviet position is indefensible. Of course, this industrial equipment
must be included in the reparations settlement. It cannot be war
booty. It does not include weapons of war. Its return to Manchuria is impractical,
but the least that can be done to repair the damage is to charge
it against the Soviet Union¡¯s share of reparations.
We have taken this position in the Far Eastern Commission. We have
been supported in it by nine other nations. But the Soviet Union, through
its use of the veto, has been able to block action in the commission.
At the time of the Peace Conference we should propose a forty-year
treaty to insure^ the demilitarization of Japan, similar to the treaty we
proposed for Germany. In this case, however, any violation of the treaty
should be reported to the Ambassadors or Ministers of the states that
drafted the treaty, who would constitute a Commission of Enforcement.
As in the German treaty, decisions would be made by a majority vote.
Both in the peace treaty and the demilitarization treaty we must look
forward to a long period of involvement in Japanese affairs. The great
progress we have made in the last two years can be lost if we do not make
sure that the changes become a permanent part of the Japanese way of
life. The spiritual disarmament of a people is a much more difficult task
than their physical disarmament. To instill the democratic concept of the
individual in the Japanese requires a major social revolution. It can be accomplished
permanently only if we make certain that a whole new generation
of Japanese is educated in accordance with this democratic ideal. Unless
this is done, the newly won rights of labor to organize, of farmers to
own their land, of women to participate in public life, and of political
parties to operate without fear, can be dissipated and destroyed. We must
work intelligently with the new generation and we must make a just economic
settlement so that that generation will have a promise of stability
and an opportunity to create a better way of life than under the old order.
I have said relatively little about China. This, is primarily because the
record of our effort there is well known. Unhappily, that record shows
little success. China still is a long way from peace. The future which could
hold so much for that great country and its millions of people is still only
a promise. It is one of the great tragedies of our times that a nation so rich
in human and material resources is split by fratricidal conflict.
The one safe generalization that can be made about China is that it
stands on the threshold of great change. We should encourage and assist
that change whenever possible. China needs the physical and human engineering
skills that we possess. The intelligent and persevering application
of those skills can prevent China¡¯s change from becoming an upheaval
that could well endanger the peace of the world. But the initiative for
applying them must come from within China herself if they are to succeed.
Awareness of China¡¯s importance is by no means confined to the United
States. My own experience as well as events have made clear the interest
of the Soviet Union in this great area bordering its eastern frontiers.
Outer Mongolia has become virtually a Soviet protectorate. At Yalta,
Stalin successfully quoted as his price for entering the Japanese war, joint
control of the two railway systems in Manchuria, a free port at Dairen,
and a naval base at Port Arthur. And, when I went to Moscow in December
1945, Mr. Molotov¡¯s great interest in China was clearly revealed by
his insistent efforts to discover what aims, hidden or otherwise, the United
States might have toward China.
Fortunately, I arrived in Moscow well prepared for Mr. Molotov. Before
Ambassador Hurley¡¯s resignation, the State Department had prepared
a statement of policy on China, the first draft of which I showed the
Ambassador a few days before he resigned. As soon as President Truman
appointed General Marshall his personal representative in China, I asked
the General to study the draft so that he could help prepare the final statement
for presentation to the President.
The Sunday before I left 'for Moscow, Under Secretary Acheson,
General Marshall and members of his staff met in my office. By the end
of the morning¡¯s discussion, we had agreed upon the statement of policy
that subsequently was approved by the President and released to the public
on December 15. Thereafter the President made no change in that
policy except upon the recommendation of General Marshall or with his
approval.
At our very first meeting in Spiridonovka House, Mr. Molotov asked
that the question of American troops in north China be discussed. I agreed
and presented him with a prepared statement giving the exact number of
troops in north China. I explained that they were there at the request of
the Chinese Government to assist in disarming 325,000 Japanese. I assured
the Soviet Government the troops would be withdrawn as soon as
this mission was completed, and pointed out that General Marshall had
gone to China as the President¡¯s personal representative to help effect a
truce that would end China¡¯s internal strife and permit the disarming of
the Japanese.
The next day I presented to the council President Truman¡¯s statement
of American policy toward China. It reiterated that our troops were in
north China to disarm the Japanese, a mission that was being delayed by
the country¡¯s internal strife, and it stressed our belief that the antagonists
should cease fighting and join in a national conference of all political parties
to unify the country.
These statements did not satisfy Mr. Molotov and he raised the question
again two days later. This time I explained in detail our obligations
to the Allies to make certain that the Japanese in north China were disarmed,
how this task had been assigned primarily to the Chinese Nationalist
forces, how they were prevented from accomplishing it because the
Communist armies stood between them and the Japanese troops, how we
had delayed taking action to disarm these Japanese ourselves because it
was a duty that had been assigned to the National government by the
Supreme Commander, and since we all recognized that government, we
thought they should be given a fair opportunity to discharge it. I assured
him that if it became necessary we would go in and disarm the Japanese
so that our troops could then return home.
Mr. Molotov said he felt Chiang Kai-shek¡¯s government exaggerated
the strength of the Communist forces. He observed that Chinese never
wished to do any fighting themselves but prefer that others do it for them.
The continued existence of these Japanese forces, he asserted, was ¡°intolerable¡±
and dryly remarked that after eight years of war Chiang Kaishek
should have learned how to handle the Japanese, particularly after
they had capitulated.
A few days later, Mr. Molotov resumed the offensive by suggesting
that a date be fixed for the simultaneous withdrawal of American and
Russian troops from China. Once again I explained that the disarmament
of the Japanese was a different problem from the one the Red Army had
faced in Manchuria. But a few minutes later he was asking the same question
he had been asking since the first day of the session.
¡°Mr. Molotov, you must be asking these questions because you like the
sound of my voice,¡± I said. ¡°I can only give you the answer I have given
you every time you have asked the question. For your advance information,
when you ask the same question tomorrow, you will get the same
answer.¡±
That evening I was to see Generalissimo Stalin. I was weary of going
through my routine with Molotov so I added this question to the items to
be discussed.
I told Stalin of my discussions with Molotov, who was present, and I
reminded him how he had declared at Potsdam that Chiang Kai-shek¡¯s
government was the only possible government in China and that the
Chinese Communists were not real Communists at all. In response, he
pointed out that the Soviet Union had a treaty recognizing Chiang. He had
no objection to the presence of our troops there, he added, but he merely
wished to be informed about it. If the Chinese people became convinced
Chiang Kai-shek was depending on foreign troops, Stalin remarked,
Chiang would lose his influence.
Taking some matches, I placed them on the table, indicating the relative
location of the Japanese troops and the Communist troops along the
railroad in North China and the troops of the National government.
Stalin became deeply interested and inquired about the size of the Communist
forces in the Tientsin area. I replied that Mao Tse Tung, the Communist
leader, claimed to have 600,000 in that area. Stalin laughed at the
statement. Pointing to the match representing National government forces
in the North China area, which I said numbered about 40,000, he asked
me what had become of the army of one and a half million that Chiang
was supposed to have. I told Him our Navy and Army had not seen them.
Stalin laughed heartily and said all Chinese were boasters who exaggerated
the forces of their opponents as well as their own. He paid a compliment
to General Marshall, saying that, if anyone could settle the situation
in China, he could.
As a result of this discussion with Stalin the council reached an agreement
the following day on the statement that was included in the protocol.
It reaffirmed that the three governments recognized the need of a unified
and democratic China under the National Government, and stated that
the Foreign Ministers of the United States and the Soviet Union were ¡°in
complete accord as to the desirability of withdrawal of Soviet and American
forces from China at the earliest practicable moment consistent with
the discharge of their obligations and responsibilities.¡±
In September 1946, General Marshall reported to the President that
it seemed useless to remain in China much longer. President Truman
authorized him to return whenever he thought his mission should be concluded.
In Paris, I told China¡¯s Foreign Minister of our decision. He
immediately expressed fear that General Marshall¡¯s departure would suggest
to the Chinese people that the United States had lost interest in
China¡¯s affairs. I assured him of our friendly interest but emphasized that
the general could not remain indefinitely when neither faction would accept
his advice.
Every effort had been made to insure the success of General Marshall¡¯s
mission. In addition to his own great prestige, he was accorded the prestige
and authority of a personal representative of the President of the United
States. At Moscow, we had secured from the Soviet Union an official reaffirmation
of their support of the National Government as the only legitimate
government in China. And the President, in his statement of policy
on December 18, 1945* had held out to the Chinese this attractive promise:
¡°When conditions in China improve we are prepared to consider aid in
carrying out . . . projects, unrelated to civil strife, which would encourage
economic reconstruction and reform in China and which, in so
doing, would promote a general revival of commercial relations between
American and Chinese businessmen.¡±
General Marshall continued his efforts until January 1947, but the warring
groups were still no nearer settlement. We then had to decide whether
Ambassador Leighton Stuart should continue the efforts to bring the two
factions together. John Carter Vincent, chief of the Far East Division and
an experienced foreign service officer, took the position that he should not ;
that, if General Marshall could not bring about unity, it would be unwise
to ask any other official to force our views upon the factions. I agreed with
Vincent.
Many of us have had the unhappy experience of intervening in the
domestic quarrel of some couple, and we have learned that, when our advice
is not wanted by either, the best course is to withdraw. This is as true
of nations as it is of married couples. In both cases our action is motivated
by friendship. But if we are to stay friendly with the couple it is always
necessary to wait until at least one of them is tired of fighting. In international
as well as domestic affairs, there are times when the best thing to
do is?to do nothing.
In our approach to the myriad troubles of Asia we should always remember
that we start with a tremendous reservoir of good will. The fulfillment
of our promise of independence to the Philippines and our acts of
friendship toward the independent Kingdom of Siam stand as beacon
lights to millions of Asiatics who are looking toward an expansion of their
political and economic freedom. In all the change that inevitably lies ahead
in Asia, we must make sure our actions do not drain this reservoir of good
will. Our own safety and security, as well as the peace of the world, depend
upon our success in being on the side of progress in Asia.

