Harper's MAGAIZINE

The Price of War

Hanson W. Baldwin

THE twentieth-century American is living
in what Toynbee has called a "time of
troubles," an age of political, economic,
and moral instability, an era of conflict. Crisis
succeeds crisis-the Italian elections in April,
Palestine in May, perhaps Iran or Scandinavia, Austria or the Far East in the summer
months.
These recurring crises are an inevitable
part of our times; the atomic bomb, biological
warfare, and long-range missiles have produced a period of insecurity perhaps unparalleled in its scope in past history. But in even
greater measure the tensions of today are the
product of the bipolar world in which we live
-a world dominated by two great superstates,
the United States and Russia, each with such
differing concepts of freedom, democracy,
human values, political and economic philosophy and ideology that friendly compromise seems impossible.
These fundamentally opposing beliefs, and
the increasing Russian toughness and aggressiveness of the past year, climaxed by the
Czechoslovakian coup and the Berlin incidents, have persuaded a growing number of
Americans that war with Russia is inevitable.
A steadily increasing minority is, indeed, urging the waging of a preventive war against
Russia before she gets the atomic bomb. We
should attack Russia, the reasoning goes, and
destroy her power to do us harm before she
attacks and destroys us.
Now it is quite clear that counsels of weakness are counsels of despair; appeasement
means disaster. It is equally clear that the
United States, if it is to remain true to its
present obligations and to its past history, has
no choice; it must oppose aggression and the
overriding of the weak by the strong. In this
age of transoceanic planes and atomic bombs
we cannot retreat within our continental
borders and seek refuge in isolationism. If
we are to remain a great power, indeed, if we
are to achieve even a reasonable degree of
physical security, we must recognize that certain areas of the world-particularly Western
Europe, a highly industrialized, thickly populated area with culture and traditions akin to
our own-are vital to us. This must be made
clear to Russia; we must, indeed, be prepared
to fight to prevent these areas from being overwhelmed by Russo-Communist aggression.
But a clearly stated and firmly implemented
policy against aggression, backed up by economic help to rehabilitate the world, political
guarantees, psychological measures, and military strength is, or should be, a far call indeed
from talk of the inevitability of war or a preventive war. Those who think in these terms
have confused fantasy with fact; they have
failed to think the problem through. They
have not weighed in the scales of the future
the intangibles of history; they have not
reckoned the consequences or the costs of a
major war in the near future; they have not
studied the probable course of such a war;
and they have assumed-fallaciously-a quick
and easy victory and a postwar millenium.

II

WHAT Would a preventive war mean?
Let us assume that such a war starts
-possibly before 1952, or at least before 1955 when Russia may have atomic
bombs-under the most favorable possible
conditions for the United States. Let us assume that we follow the counsels of the preventive war advocates and that we deliberately
attack Russia by surprise with the atomic
bomb before Russia is able to retaliate in
kind. What would be the course of such a war?
Geography and distances still have meaning
even in the air age. Many of the most vital
Russian industrial targets are beyond range
of bombers now available (or to be available
in the next few years) unless we use "kamikaze" tactics or "suicide'" one-way raids or
some type of "shuttle" bombing. Attacks by
such means-particularly upon Moscow and
objectives in Western Russia-would be possible, and some atomic bombs undoubtedly
could be delivered upon their targets, despite
Russian vigilance. The costs, however, would
be high, and the gamble almost a desperate
one.
For if "suicide" raids were undertaken we
should have to reconcile ourselves to the certain loss of all bombers participating and the
majority of the crews. "Shuttle" raids-if the
bases were available-would be less costly but
still expensive, particularly if the other end
of the "shuttle" were to be-as has been suggested-a crash landing in the ocean next to
a friendly submarine. The Russians, though
weak in night fighters and radar, are known
to possess great numbers of day fighters, many
of them jets. Jets are based even in the remote
wilds of Siberia, as our Air Force discovered
some time ago when one of our planes operating off Alaska was "buzzed" by Russian jet
fighters. Bomber losses in the daytime, therefore, probably would be high, and atomic
bomb
wastage considerable; some bombers
would never reach their targets. Yet so vast
is Russian space that some objectives in Russia
could not be reached in night-time flights
alone. Moreover, bombing at night or blind
daylight bombing at high altitudes above an
overcast might merely result in ploughing up
Russian steppes, for we do not possess accurate maps of 
the interior of Russia. The area east
of the Urals, which is becoming more and
more important in the Russian industrial
picture. is, indeed, almost unknown; extensive photo-reconnaissance would be imperative if we were to expect any accurate results
from radar bombing.
All this emphasizes the difficulties of winning a quick and easy war against Russia by
a sudden surprise attack; such an attack would
be a terriffic gamble, with no certainty as to
its outcome. There is, in addition, one other
factor which is a major argument against embarking upon such a gamble. We possess few
-very few-atomic bombs; the numbers available are so limited that our atomic attack
might well be a one- or two-shot effort.

BUT there is an even 
more clinching
reason against taking such a gamble.
The atomic bomb cannot stop the Red
Army. The obvious Russian counter to an air
attack by us upon Russian cities or industries
is to move into Western Europe. All of our
military leaders concede that today, and for
the foreseeable future, we could not stop such
a move; not until Western Europe is rehabilitated and its military strength built up would
there be much prospect of holding off the
Russian ground hordes. We would, therefore, by bombing Russia bring about the very
thing we are trying to prevent-Russian conquest of Western Europe.
Instead of a quick atomic blitzkreig we
would then be involved in a long-drawn-out
war of attrition. For our major objective
must then become the elimination of the
Russian armies in Western Europe. This
would be easier said than done. We are not
likely to use the atomic bomb against Paris
or the Hague. We could and would bomb
Russian industry and supply lines, but to do
so effectively a two-way bombing offensive-
continuous and not sporadic like a one-way
suicide technique-would be necessary. This
would mean bases close enough to Russian
objectives to permit such bombing-bases in
England, North Africa, the Middle East, Iceland, Greenland, Alaska, Japan-eventually
perhaps in Asia and Europe itself. And in
turn these bases would mean ground forces
to seize and protect them and sea forces in
great quantities-it takes twenty shiploads of
concrete, for instance, to construct a single
airstrip for use by the new B-36 bomber-to
supply them.
Nor would bombing of Russian supply lines
and industry-even atomic bombing (which
would have to be intermittent because of
our limited production)-necessarily mean a
quick and easy victory. The Russians live off
the country; B. H. Liddell Hart in his new
book, The German Generals Talk, quotes
General Manteuffel as saying:


The [Russian] soldier carries a sack on
his back, with dry crusts of bread and raw
vegetables collected on the march. The
horses eat the straw from the rooftops. You
can't stop them like an ordinary army, by
cutting their communications, for you
rarely find any supply columns to strike.


The Red Army, aided by Communist sympathizers in the West, would also attempt to
utilize the factories of occupied France, Germany, etc., for their purposes.
Bombing alone, therefore, would not promise a quick or easy victory; sooner or later, the
probabilities are, we would have to invade
Europe on land. A preventive war, therefore,
would be, at very best, a tremendous gamble;
it promises no certainty of quick and easy
victory, but would be more likely to evolve
into a bloody, protracted war of attrition,
costly in men and money. Sooner or later-
if we did not make the mistakes of Napoleon
and Hitler and attempt a deep invasion of
Russia-we would emerge victorious. But at
what costs!

III

VICTORY, in such a conflict, would be
hollow, or nearly so. Consider the economic costs to the United States. Today, largely owing to war debts, the average
taxpayer is paying six times the tax paid in
1921; our national debt of almost $260,000,
t00,000 is astronomical. But the costs of
the past war would be as nothing to the costs
of World War III. If a major war should
come in the near future and if its costs should
be piled upon those of World War II, the
economic security of the United States would
be imperiled as never before, and probably no
eventual course-save repudiation of the national debt with all that that would mean to
every individual-would be possible.
But the political, as well as the economic
costs, would be major. We would be fighting
a two-front war-against the subversive forces
of Communism in this country as well as
against Russian forces overseas. Increasingly
repressive legislation-certain to limit and restrict our civil liberties-would certainly result, and the increasingly dangerous centralization and authoritarianism of federal government would tremendously increase.
Casualties would be major, nor would they
be limited to the fighting forces; we could not
hope to escape some Russian attacks upon our
cities, even though made only with conventional bombs.
But the greatest loss would be in Europe;
the very things we are trying to save in Western Europe might be forever gone. Another
war in the near future would be a triumph
for extremism-whether of the right or the
left; the middle way-the American way-
would be eliminated. For a Europe, already
seriously ill economically and politically and
morally, would be dealt a death blow if the
infection of armed conflict were again to
ravage its body politic. The ideals and cultures of Western Civilization probably would
be forever destroyed if war came before recovery from past illness were accomplished.
Preventive war would, therefore, defeat our
own purpose; we could conquer Russia, but
you do not defeat ideologies by the sword.
And what if "victory" were accomplished?
There would be no brave new world, no
millenium of peace on earth, good will
toward men. If we think the tasks of postwar reconstruction are major today, what
would they be after a war with Russia? What
would we do with Russia? How immense the
difficulties of policing and occupying would
be, even if limited only to strategic points and
border provinces.
There is, therefore, no promise of easy victory and perfect peace in preventive war-only
a great gamble, which would probably lead
to blood and suffering, toil and sweat, and perhaps disaster. It would solve nothing; on the
contrary, even if it resulted in an eventual
"victory" our present difficulties of reconstruction and rehabilitation would be exaggerated;
we might, indeed, in the process of "victory"
lose what we are trying to defend-our way of
life.


ALL the above objections to the facile thesis
of a preventive war leave unspoken
two paramount objections.
One is the moral: how can we, a professedly
Christian nation, the leading opponent of the
philosophy that the ends justify any means,
descend to the expediency of Communism?
Are we to steel our hearts to the deliberate
slaughter by atomic means and in surprise attack of thousands of Russian women and chil
dren, and if so can we ever again profess moral
purpose or spiritual motive behind our political philosophy?
The other objection is historical: the advocates of a preventive war take no account
of the intangibles of history; they assume that
war with Russia is someday inevitable; therefore let it come now under favorable conditions for the United States. This is dangerous thinking, for when a people's minds accept the inevitability of war, war is inevitable.
Let us admit that unless the balance of power
in the world is restored, unless Western
Europe is rehabilitated, war with Russia someday is probable; but do not let us forget the
intangibles of history-which may loom large
in the years to come-if man allows time to
work its way. Who knows, for instance, what
inay occur within Russia as the years pass?
May there not be, at least, another Trotsky-
like split when Stalin dies? What other powers
may not rise in East and West to balance or
modify the present bipolarity that now exists?
What subtle workings of men's minds and
hearts may not occur to change our thinking?
What other technological devices-perhaps defensive in nature-may not alter all our present concepts?
Let us not forget the intangibles of history
and the hope that they may bring; let us not
abandon the moral precepts behind our political philosophy.
Let us rid our thinking of preventive war;
it is an alien and repugnant concept. Let us-
while facing danger squarely-eliminate fatalism; war with Russia, though possible or
even probable. is not inevitable. Even if it
should some day come it is far better to postpone it than to experience it now. with the
world already weakened by past ravages. The
United States can defeat Russia tomorrow as
well as today; the task would not be easy. but
there is no prospect that Russia can overtake
the industrial-military lead of the United
States in the lifetime of this generation. If
war has to come it is far better that it come
twenty years from now than today. But we
must not think of it as inevitable. Such a mental reorientation means in no sense either appeasement or weakness, nor does it imply a
change of political policy. The European Recovery Program, the political and military
strengthening of the West, a strong stand
against aggression in any form-all these policies must be supported. We must maintain
our military strength. We must be realists-
aware of the dangers of the world we live in,
watchful and alert, but not alarmist. firm and
strong but not provocative, definite and precise but patient. We face a "time of troubles."
But we shall not ease our way by inviting war.





























