Restoring a power station in Stalingrad?"Russia¡¯s weakness, as compared to our strength, is a powerful factor against imminent war.


War With Russia??The Balance Sheet
In spite of our differences with the Soviet,
the signs of immediate conflict are lacking. 

Hanson W. BALDWIN

IS there danger of a shooting war between Russia and the United States ?
" The sharp political, economic and
ideological conflict between the two countries and the consequent division of the
world into two worlds have aroused fears
that the present ¡°cold war¡± might become
a ¡°hot war.¡± A few of our military
leaders have said publicly?and more privately?that war with Russia is ¡°imminent,¡± ¡°likely,¡± ¡°probable¡± or ¡°possible,¡±
within one, two, three or five years.
Much of this talk is based on fantasy,
but it has some of its roots in the sour
soil of present world conditions. For
there are strong forces that are driving
us toward a shooting war, and there are
other influences that vector us toward
peace.
These forces, pro and con, are not
easily classified and tagged, but they can
be generally described* Those who fear
war base their concern on the economic,
political and ideological rivalry between
Russia and the West, which makes the
world ¡°two worlds¡±; the existence of
¡°sore spots¡± or zones of mutual interest
of the two great-power combinations
with expanding world interests, and the
fear of an "incident¡± as spark for this
tinder.

As counter-weights to these influences
are Russian weakness and American
repugnance to war; mutual fear of the
catastrophic effects of the atomic bomb
and other new weapons, and the unlikelihood of an incident serious enough to
start a world conflagration.
Let us examine first the dangers inherent in any condition of world rivalry.
From the long-term point of view the
economic, political and ideological rift between Russia and the West seems almost
unbridgeable. There is the conflict of
economies?the economy of capitalism
and the economy of communism. There
is also the ideological conflict, the conflict with international communism which
holds that the end justifies any means?
proselytizing, subverting, spying and trying to undermine the structure of the
West. It is a struggle between a half-feudalistict
totalitarian dictatorship and
an industrialized democracy with the
highest material standards of living in
the world.
But conflict always has been part of
the life of men and nations, and the existence of economic, ideological and political differences does not inevitably mean
shooting war.
For no nation wants war There is
war weariness among the people of the
world; the Soviet peasant and the American laborer both want bread and peace.

NOR do the governments want war at
this time. The objective of the American
Government is to avert war?not to precipitate it?but our leaders do not believe
this can be done by appeasement or weakness. The men in the Kremlin also hope
to avert war??though for different reasons. They are leading from weakness
and they know it.
There has been far too much talk
in this country about American ¡°weakness.¡± In a military sense we still are the
greatest power in the world?potentially
and in many ways actually. Our Army
is smaller than the Russian, but considerably better equipped, and it has vast reserves of war veterans and materiel behind it. Our air force maintains fewer
planes in operating squadrons, but has
more planes in storage and reserve, and
we have incomparably better planes and
pilots and technique; the Russians have
no strategic bombing force worthy of the
name and their air force is technically
and tactically obsolescent.

OUR Navy is larger than all the rest of
the navies of the world; we could use the
seas for our purposes and deny their use
to Russia. We possess atomic bombs,
probably numbered in two or three figures;
Russia has none. Our industry is incomparably superior to Russia¡¯s; factories
and transportation systems are undamaged by war; in developed resources we
are far ahead of the Soviet states.
In contrast to our strength Russia
shows definite weaknesses. She maintains the
largest army in the world?a
definite index of her one advantage of mass size. But it
is an army indifferently
equipped. Many of its members have become aware during their service beyond Russia¡¯s frontiers that the Soviet
Republics are militarily backward compared to many of the
states that border them; desertion rates have been high.
Russia also has major internal problems. The harvest
this year appears to be good,
relieving the near-famine conditions of last winter, but the
post-war Five Year Plan for
the expansion and reconstruction of Soviet industry and
transportation is far behind
schedule. Russia received terrific damage during the war
and it is by no means repaired.
Some of her people are weary
of privations, and the Ukraine,
the Crimea and some other
sections contain dissident elements.
Even in Russia¡¯s satellite
system there is weakness; the
Soviet rejection of the Marshall Plan is viewed by some
authorities as confirmation of
the tenuous nature of Russia's
hold upon her neighboring
states.

THERE are, moreover, political storms brewing in Russia- Stalin¡¯s death will precipitate not a popular revolution
but a definite ¡°palace" struggle
which may result in the creation of another Trotsky-like
faction of the Communist
party, or in the liquidation of
the unsuccessful claimants for
power. The importance of either outcome should not be exaggerated. There is every indication that, Stalin or no Stalin,
Russian policy will remain
largely unchanged. But factional struggles weaken and
divert, and Russia today already contains many seeds of
serious weakness.
This weakness, as compared
to our strength, is. therefore,
a powerful factor against imminent war. For the next five
or ten years there could be
very little doubt about the
eventual outcome of a war between Russia and the United
States, This country would
indubitably triumph, unless we
disregarded all historical precedent and duplicated the mistakes of Napoleon and Hitler.
Russia could overrun much
of Europe, perhaps all of it,
in the opening weeks and
months of such a war; there
is little doubt of that. But the
considered judgment of some
of our highest ranking military men is that she could not
hold the areas won. Her armies would be sitting on a volcano of unrest and rebellion;
her industry and her transportation and communication
systems are too weak to support satisfactorily a large-scale protracted war effort,

AS the United States mobilized its strength and used
its great advantage of mobility in the air and at sea, the
Soviets would find themselves
beset with constantly growing
power at many different
points. Moreover, Russian
industry today-contrary to
popular impression ?? is far
more concentrated and more
vulnerable than American industry; it could probably be
bombed into impotence.
All this would not he easy;
any war with Russia would be
hard and bloody, for Russian
mass and Russian stubbornness would make the Soviets
a dangerous foe. But for the
next five years at least the
outcome of a war with Russia would be as certain as anything human is certain--Russia would lose.
Here, then, is a powerful
factor against war.
But there is an even more
important one. Russia does
not want war because she does
not believe?or so the ¡°party
line¡± goes?that she will need
it. The Communist apostles
preach that the capitalist system contains within itself the
seeds of its own destruction.
Since the war they have been
counting powerfully upon an
economic depression in the
United States and in the western world- With that wishful
thinking typical of the oriental mind, the Russians have
even set the date for the great
depression,
Unfortunately for them and
fortunately for us, the calendar of the party line already
has been forced into two adjustments. First, the great
American depression was predicted for last fall, then for
last spring; now the Communists are trying to convince
themselves?and usìéthat a
major depression will sweep
the United States in the near
future.
The Russians still hope?
and believe, therefore?that
they will not have to resort to
a shooting war to achieve their
aims; the immutable laws of
Marxian economics, plus as
much subversion as the international Communist party can
arrange, will do the Job for
them.

So much for the first set
of factors that tend toward
and against war. In general,
for the immediate future at
least, they appear to strike a
balance.
But there is the second set
of opposed forces?the friction-breeding ¡°sore spots" of
the world, countered by the
universal fear of what might
happen to victor and vanquished alike if localized battles were allowed to bring on
a general war.
The world¡¯s ¡°sore spots¡± are
the result not only of ideological and political differences
but represent, in part, the
changing nature of our world.
The shrinkage of the time-space factor by the speed of
modern communications and
the expanding ¡°spheres of influence¡± of the two great
world power groupings mean
that at various points on the
earth¡¯s surface Russian interests and United States interests impinge upon each other
and come into collision.
There are many such points
?Korea£¬China and Manchuria. Turkey and Greece, Trieste. Hungary and Austria,
and above all Germany. But,
so far these points are neutral ground¡±; that is to say.
there are no contiguous American and Russian national borders. Both great powers are
working through intermediaries. This is more important
than it sounds, for it means
that neither power is likely to
be maneuvered into a spot so
tight that no backdown is possible. If the Russian border
were contiguous to the Greek
frontier and the Russian
Army, rather than the Albanian, the Bulgarian and the
Yugoslav were training, equipping and supplying the Greek
guerrillas, the Greek situation
would be far more critical But
as it is, the Russians, displaying their typical caution and
the indirect tactics so well
loved by the Communists, are
working through satellites
and puppets, which permits
the Kremlin to back its allies
to the full, or to disavow
them depending upon the
winds of expediency.
These sore points should be
treated and. if possible, cured.
That no immediate cure for
all?or for that matter, for any
of them is in sight is a factor that makes for continuing
international tension and crisis.
BUT there is a powerful deterrent to keep localized infections from turning into  
a general shooting war. The
people of the world know,
and Moscow and Washington
know, that if general war
comes, it will not be limited,
as the present localized skirmishes are, to guns and bullets
and planes and tanks¡£ The
atomic bomb£» guided missiles£¬
biological warfare£¬radioactive
gases and other weapons of
mass destruction either have
been proved as war weapons
or are under rapid development in laboratories and testing grounds. Fear of the results of war never has prevented war, but nevertheless
in this atomic age, the fear of
what the technological revolution may mean to the world if
war comes does have a powerful psychological effect.
These two sets of forces
¡ªfor and against war?seem
to lie in uneasy balance.
Long-term causes for war be.
tween Russia and the United
States certainly exist, but war
between these great powers in
the near future is unlikely unless events get out of control,
in other words, unless an ¡°incident¡¯¡¯ occurs£¬
Incidents are, of course,
possible, but one on the order
of a Pearl Harbor, large
enough to cause war, seems
improbable¡¢ The American
people are becoming more mature, more used to the idea of
a world of uneasy non-belligerence. And, perhaps even
more important, Russia is a
police state where public opinion is controlled and can be
Inflamed only by the deliberate desire and intent of the
Government. And we have
seen that the Kremlin
probably does not want war in
the near future.
But the overwhelming conclusion is unavoidable that
peace (at least in the next
few years) and the course of
future history depend more
upon us than upon Russia. For
in the present crisis and
in the years of trial immediately ahead, we hold the
cards. Absolute firmness, but
-not appeasement; fairness but
not provocation; strength but
strength that is neither flamboyant nor unnecessarily militaristic must be the American
formula. It is a difficult formula for it is essentially a
middle - of * the - road formula
and the avoidance of extremism is always difficult. 

Today there is one major
objective?to win the non-shooting; war now joined. If
we can win the battle for the
minds of men, if our political
philosophy and economic system can prove themselves in
the world struggle, shooting
war with Russia may be
averted, not merely postponed. 

ALL this focuses upon us
the responsibility of history.
Our own economic house must
be put in order. We must help
Europeans to help themselves.
The voice of America must
speak?literally and figuratively
?to the ends of the
earth. There must be no encouragement of the growth of
new isolationism and no development of military imperialism. We must talk
the middle way. 
For the United States is a
world power, and we bear, in
our generation and in the generations to come, the responsibilities of power. We may
evade them, but if we do we
shall mark from that moment
the decline and fall of American influence, and what will
be worse, ours will be the
responsibility of world guilt. 
