What the War costs 




TO EARTHQUAKE, no hurricane, no flood
known to the record has matched
World War II in destructiveness. No
previous war-the incursions of Attila and his
Huns, the pillagings of the barbarians in the
declining years of the Roman Empire, the
frightful scourgings of men and cities during
the Thirty Years War-did anywhere near
so much damage. Even World War I was
only one-seventh as destructive.
What did it all cost? Naturally no tabulation of figures can tell the whole story, for
the full, consequences to posterity will be
reckoned and rereckoned as generations of
historians yet unborn study the record-unless memory of it is obliterated in a worse
man-made catastrophe hereafter.
Nevertheless the ramifications of the cost
can be traced, estimates of fractions of the
damage ferreted out, and grand totals constructed which will convey some sense of the
magnitude of the disaster. What a war costs
depends upon who is doing the counting,
what is thought to be a cost, and the purpose
for which the estimate is made. Governments
seeking reparations offer higher estimates
than governments seeking to hearten their
people to undertake reconstruction. All
figures are open to criticism by experts working from different assumptions: all in the end
are equally approximations or informed
guesses. But two broad kinds of costs appear
in all estimates: first, the cost in human lives;
and second, the material costs, which include
both the expense of gathering together the
weapons, other equipment, and the men to
fight the war, and the cost of the destruction
inflicted on the world by the use of the
weapons.

THE life-cost of World War II fell far
more heavily on civilians than on the
men in uniform. The sardonic joke
about the front line being the safest place in
wartime became in many places the unvarnished truth. In no war in modern times have
so many civilians suffered death in so many
different ways as in World War II. There
were the deaths by bombing (three hundred
times more numerous than in World War I);
the planned killings of civilians by the hundreds of thousands in extermination and concentration camps; the losses in underground
movements (which in some countries were
three or four times bigger than the losses
in the regular armies); and the further deaths
when people were turned out of their homes
onto the roads to wander about looking without real hope for a haven, or were herded
like cattle into freight cars and taken to
labor for the enemy as slaves, with thousands
of them inevitably dying long before their
time. Taking all these into account, we may
safely conclude that at least three times as
many civilians died because of the war as
died in the armed forces.
What, then, were the losses in the armed
forces? General George C. Marshall has
estimated that the principal belligerents lost
15 million dead and missing. It is likely that
the smaller countries lost another 1 1/2 million in the same way. Most of the missing
later turned up as prisoners of war, but as
there was protracted and illegal delay in
repatriating Axis prisoners-a task still not
completed by the USSR-some of these must
have lost their lives. At any rate it would
seem conservative, bearing all these figures
in mind, to say that in all at least ten million
members of the armed services came to their
deaths.
Add three civilian deaths for every one of
these, and we add thirty million to ten million-arriving at forty million as a total
for deaths in World War II. That is just
about equivalent to all the children in the
United States under nineteen years of age.

OF THE material costs, the largest by all
odds came from that most appalling
innovation in ruthless destruction, air
bombardment-especially area raids which
were indiscriminate in that no specific target
was aimed at. Aside from air bombardment,
the chief causes of destruction in World War
II were undersea and surface warfare against
both merchant and naval ships, and warfare
on land, including underground activities and
the scorched-earth techniques used by nations
retreating out of their own territory and also
used by an enemy when driven from occupied
territory. These various kinds of destruction
cannot be exactly differentiated from one
another. For instance, ships were sunk from
the air as well as by surface ships and submarines, and ground operations were usually
preceded and accompanied by air bombardment. Nevertheless we are reasonably sure
that air bombardment, whether carried on
behind the enemy's lines as in the raids on
Britain and Germany, or as a phase of frontline operations, caused by far the greatest
proportion of the damage.
Air bombardment was intended to destroy
the ability to manufacture munitions. But
munitions production today involves in one
way or another practically the whole economy
of a nation; a campaign against munitions
production is an effort to destroy a nation's
economic life. Of the bomb tonnage dropped
on Europe, over half fell on Germany, about
one-fifth on France, about one-eighth on
Italy; the rest was scattered. Germany, of
course, was the principal source of munitions
on the Continent as well as leader of the Axis.
If we divide up the bomb tonnage another
way, we find that three quarters of it was
dropped to destroy the ability to produce,
while the rest fell on more narrowly defined
military targets. As practiced in World War
II, air bombardment represents the most systematic effort ever made to destroy the economic underpinnings of nations. In destroying a nation's power to make. war, one destroys a nation's ability to keep its citizens
alive. This paradox will plague us as long
as war exists. This is why it is taking so long
to "restore" Europe.
To destroy an enemy's ability to produce,
one does not have to destroy literaly everything. The job can be very efficiently done
by smashing up the transportation system,
especially the railroads but also the roads
(particularly the bridges) and the canals. No
modern nation can function for long without rapid and certain circulation of freight.
Out of every 100 tons of bombs dropped on
Europe, 31 were aimed at inland transport,
chiefly railroads.
At one time or another special efforts were
made to knock out factories making oil from
coal, aluminum, airplane engines and frames,
and submarines. (It was discovered that the
effects of bombing on industries vary enormously. For instance, the heavy equipment
of steel works is exceedingly difficult to damage, but the works can be slowed down,
though not finally stopped, if the water and
gas lines serving them are broken. On the
other hand, plants producing oil from coal
are highly vulnerable, as are most chemical
plants, and can be sufficiently damaged by
bombs to be knocked out permanently.) But
it was not until well into 1943 that the effects
of bombing on German production became
noticeable and not until another year had
passed, when the railroads began to fall apart,
that the final, fatal decline began. In proportion as the railroads were battered, the
decline accelerated. When the war ended,
maps showing the condition of Europe's railroads resembled nothing so much as those
pictures of germs seen through a microscope
-merely disconnected dashes. The men who
planned the wrecking of Europe's transportation knew precisely what they were doing.
They smashed what any economist or technologist would tell them was the basic service
of any economy.
The same lesson was learned with regard to
transportation by sea. The critical phase of
the battle to keep Britain in the war was
the effort to keep supplies moving in from
overseas. On the other side of the world the
same lesson was enforced. Japan was well on
the way to final industrial decline even before
the United States captured bases from which
bombers could operate against factories. This
was because Japanese factories could not operate without a steady flow of supplies from
across the sea, and the immensely successful
American campaign against Japanese cargo
shipping had halted this flow.
The planned destruction of a nation's capacity to make war is one thing; the planned
destruction of people's houses is quite another. The assault on dwellings ranks as one
of the great horrors of the war. Cities heavily
bombed often lost half their dwellings, and
in areas bitterly fought over on the ground
and from the air, like vast portions of Russia,
the number of people left homeless ran into
millions. Terror and obliteration air-raids
were considered successful almost in proportion to the number of people who lost their
homes; for homeless people cannot work well,
and production falls toward zero. It was for
these reasons that 20 out of every 100 residential buildings in Germany were destroyed,
that every fifth Greek was left homeless, that
28,000 houses in Rotterdam alone were
knocked down, that the British had 460,000
houses destroyed and the Japanese two and a
quarter million. Even in New Guinea numerous native villages were flattened to the
ground.
What this wholesale destruction of dwelling space meant in human terms it is impossible even for people with highly developed
imaginations to grasp. And with the "space'
went the furniture and other equipment and
possessions of the millions of human beings
who occupied it, often things painfully
gathered after hard toil over many years.
That man did all this to himself only adds
the final touch of irony.

TO THE COSTS of waging the war and the
costs of the destruction of railroads,
1 roads, canals, ships, docks, factories, and
dwelling houses must be added others which
seldom appear in published totals because they
occur only to the minds of specialists. Among
these are such things as the cost of raw materials, manufactured articles, and foodstuffs carried off by invaders to help sustain their
production for war; the worth of the labor
power carried away from invaded countries to
provide "hands" for the industries of the
enemy; the cost of running down equipment
by neglecting maintenance during a war; the
cost of the reckless use of natural resources;
the eventual cost of having, on the one hand,
sold off foreign investments and, on the other,
run up the nation's debts owed abroad; the disorganization of established systems of trade
and finance; and the cost of depressing the
standard of living of the people by diverting
more and more of total national production
from consumption for well-being to expenditure on war. These, too, are among the things
which leave nations at the end of a war in
such desperate straits; these, too, are part of
the cost of a war, however difficult it may be
to place a dollar value on them.
It was these various kinds of costs which,
when piled one on top of the other, reduced
Europe and the Far East to such low levels
at the war's end. It was clear that the world
had suffered a catastrophic blow. In Europe
the blow appeared mortal. The continent
which was the homeland from which Western
civilization had spread over the entire globe
was teetering on the edge of final collapse.
What, then, was the grand total of the cost
of achieving this frightening end? Let us try
to add the figures up.
The military expenditures recorded in national budgets-let
accurate-come to a total of over one trillion
dollars, or $1,117,000,000,000. Let us further
assume that the cost of destruction came to
at least twice that figure; this is a very modest
assumption indeed, for in some countries it
was much more than twice, though in others
it was less. This would give us a figure of a
little less than two and a quarter trillions, or
$2,234,000,000,000, Toss in an additional
$650,000,000,000 for the sort of losses which
I have said above tend to elude even the most
industrious figure-makers. Then add up these
monstrous sums, and you get a grand total of
just about four trillion dollars. Or, if a trillion
is difficult to comprehend, say four thousand
thousand million dollars.
Forty million people and four trillion dollars. Look hard at those figures and you
begin dimly to see what World War II cost.
And even so, you have left out the moral
cost of what man so systematically and purposefully did to man.
Should there be a World War III, the situation will be far worse. At Hiroshima a single
atom bomb killed one and a half times as
many people as were killed in air bombardments in England during all of World War II.
Since the atom bomb is by its very nature
adapted only to area raids, to indiscriminate
destruction of a highly generalized target,
such as an entire city, we can estimate that if
this weapon should come into use the destruction in World War III will advance, not a
mere seven times as from World War I to II,
but on the order of seventy times. If World
War II was destructive enough to set civilization back on its haunches for an indefinite
period, World War III would be pretty certain to put it flat on its back for many genmere seven times as from World War I to II,





























