


What armaments and foreign relief
are doing to our economy

Boom or Depression?

By COLSTON E. WARNE
Professor of Economics, Amherst College

SELDOM has the nation faced a more
confused economic situation. Stories of
declining prices and factory lay-offs appear
alongside accounts of unprecedented peacetime military and European relief appropriations. Some economists herald the beginning 
of an old-fashioned depression; others speak 
of a ¡°price plateau¡± from which, in the months
ahead, the inflationary ascent will again begin, Both groups cannot be right.
Much of the sensitivity concerning the
present pause in prices and production arises
from memories of the past. Many, all too 
vividly, recall the depth and persistence of
the depression of the 1930 s and doubt that
the current high level of national income (in 
1948, $224,000,000,000), can persist. Many 
who shared in the smug satisfaction of the
Coolidge-Hoover era bring to mind Black 
Friday of October, 1929. Many, with longer
memories, recollect the radiant optimism immediately after World War I and the speed 
with which the crest of prices was passed in 
1920 and goods shortages became unmanageable surpluses.
For ten full years, the nation has had little
cause to bring to mind these sobering reflections. We have had national prosperity and 
full employment, initiated by deficit spending 
for defense and sustained by unprecedented 
war-time borrowing. This has created a federal debt of $252 billion and, for a short
period at least, brought a post-war capacity 
to absorb an ever-mounting quantity of consumer goods.
Today, intermingled with the drastic effects of the past war and the current military 
preparedness, another powerful factor contributes to our national confusion of mind.
Business, agriculture, and labor, each represented by potent federations, now offer conflicting policies for the nation. Each asserts
that, in the absence of its program, imminent
collapse lies ahead. Business wants lower corporate taxes, no wage increases, a minimum
program of social reform, the abandonment
of major residual war-time controls, and a
firm recognition that only through high profits
and even more substantial investment will we
achieve desired stability. The major agricultural lobbies demand firm federal guarantees
of farm income and insist that the retention 
of prosperity rests fundamentally upon high 
incomes for farmers, To organized labor, the
imperative need is higher wages, an extension 
of social security, federal housing, the taxation of excessive profits, coupled with a strong 
program of government control over business monopolies.
These major groups have in common the
identification of their own income with national well-being. Each displays in its statements a sense of fright, lest the days of prosperity be numbered. Each, operating in an 
economy which denies the merit of developing a central plan, trusts that its ideas will
gain wide enough popular support so that its
program will become public policy.
Between these contestants our political leaders grope for compromises, Yet these leaders
fail to erase the fundamental fright which has
come to grip the nation--a fear of closed 
factories, bankruptcy, and bread lines, and of
agricultural distress, Even the anticipated 
election of Governor Dewey last fall failed 
to bolster the stock market in the face of exceptional peace-time earning records. The
victory of President Truman has not served 
to stop a steady but slow downward drift of
the wholesale commodity index and a similarmovement in agricultural prices. The appearance of the President¡¯s Economic Report in 
January, 1949£¬' brought brief, heated discussion over the merits of an extensive plan 
for governmental intervention to bolster low
incomes, to tax profits, and to stop any unwarranted advance in commodity prices. No 
concrete action has resulted. As the Eighty-first Congress displayed traits remarkably 
similar to those of the Eightieth Congress, it
became apparent that, except for agriculture,
something of a stalemate had developed. The
nation failed to define its policy as its leaders
could not determine whether our problem is
clearly one of inflation or deflation.

II
As the middle of 1949 approached, it became apparent that the Truman election promises for broad domestic social reforms were
only to be fulfilled in small measure. Priority 
was given to military expenditures and to 
foreign relief grants which were assured of a
more favorable Congressional climate, Matters of domestic concern remained in sharp 
dispute and subject to the veto of the Republican-Southern Democratic coalition.
More and more, the immediate situation 
here and abroad pointed to the saturation of
markets and deflation which would, if unchecked, imperil our plans for world recovery 
and sustained full employment. In this atmosphere, little objection was to be noted in expanding military appropriations and in fostering measures designed to expand the flow of
capital and credit abroad. When this trend 
lent support to the making of firm financial
and military commitments to buttress the
Atlantic Pact, some of our more cautious diplomatic advisers, notably John Foster Dulles,
began to express fears as to the eventual economic consequences of our course of action.
A slow but definite downward trend had 
established itself in the major indices of business. Industrial output in the first quarter of
1949 had sagged some 5 per cent with a special weakness appearing in textiles, paper,
and in fuels. Consequent upon these declines,
unemployment advanced markedly and was
unofficially established in excess of 4 million 
workers at the outset of April with every 
indication that the normal seasonal spring 
advance in jobs would be less than usual.
Only in the steel and automobile industries
was production continuing at exceptionally 
high levels. Even there, price cuts were beginning to emerge.
Farm prices declined drastically in early 
1949, due to heavy carry-overs and the current crop prospects. This downward trend 
found some reflection in retail prices although 
the tendency was for wholesale levels of food 
to fall far more rapidly than retail. Personal
buying witnessed the same downward trend,
especially in clothing and house furnishings
although automobile sales remained high. For
the first quarter since the end of the war, installment buying decreased. Even the easing 
of the regulations concerning consumer credit
proved no offset
The same tapering off occurred in plant
expansion; building programs were being 
markedly curtailed at the close of 1948. Residential construction was weakening and future
construction plans were being adversely affected by the accumulation of unsold houses
held for high prices. The inventories of the
nation were close to record highs by March 
31, reaching on an over-all basis some $55 billion, an amount triple the pre-war level. The
dollar shortage abroad resulted in a drop in 
the level of net exports during 1948. The total
for the year exceeded imports by $6.5 billion,
reflecting both a decrease in exports and an 
increase in imports.
Reports on industrial profits also suggested a marked reversal of previous trends.
Production curtailments had been made in 
many fields due to slackened demand, but
costs of production remained high. Most concerns had, by earlier policies of accumulating 
reserves, placed themselves in a strong financial position which tended to make thorn proceed slowly with downward price adjustments.
The picture here described is clearly not
one of a dynamic and expanding economy.
Only an incorrigible optimist would continue
the projection of a 3 per cent annual uptrend 
in the nation¡¯s economy, such as was tentatively outlined by the Council of Economic
Advisers. As one of the Council¡¯s ablest statisticians has put it,
¡°The long-run deflationary trends in the economy seem to be catching up with the immediate short-run inflationary influences.¡±
We are certainly at a
point of hesitation. No sharp, decisive dis
aster has yet overtaken us. Nevertheless the
pattern is one which brings indications of
alarm from cautious observers.
One such observer, David Lawrence, comments:

It makes one shudder to think what the outbreak 
of sudden peace might mean to the American
economy. It could make the difference between
recession or mild readjustment, such as is being
experienced today, and deep depression. Small
wonder perhaps that an armament economy is so
easy to perpetuate and that all thoughts of a peacetime substitute?a world economy based on normal relationships?seems at the moment to be less 
and less in the mind of governmental officials.

Basing his assertion upon the opinion by Senator Millard Tydings that the cold war is costing the United States at least $10 billion a
year, Mr. Lawrence pleads for sonic means
of bringing Russia into a peaceful relationship with the rest of the world.
Mr. Lawrence is by no means to be associated with radical thought. His attitude reflects
instead the growing uneasiness of business
over the highly artificial military prop which 
is currently sustaining our economy.
As Dr. E, G, Noursc, Chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisers contributed his
appraisal of the situation on April 5, 1949:

It is still too soon to be sure whether this casing
will go so much further as to produce a real
'recession* or whether it may level out or give
way to renewed forces of inflation. Moreover, the
weakness that has been reflected in recent price
movements has occurred primarily in the area of
soft goods. In the field of hard goods, where additional defense expenditures would have their main
impact, there has been, it is true, some tendency 
toward casing, but it is not sufficient in magnitude
to create a situation of surplus in the area.

From the above, it will be seen that the
economic setting in the United States still remains favorable but precarious. As a nation,
employment is high although not at peak 
levels. The discussion of the problem still includes references to ¡°a momentary hesitation¡± ¡°an economic plateau,¡± or ¡°the shaking down of the economy.¡± Nevertheless, it
is abundantly clear that the short-run forces
?the need to build up inventories and the
pent-up demand for durable goods?have
spent themselves. We are moving toward a
period which is to be more largely influenced 
by two major factors: (1) The impact of the
cold war upon our economy; and (2) appropriations for armaments, public works, and 
social welfare. In a word, the future price
picture is likely to be largely dependent upon 
the rate of governmental spending, If Congress were disposed to launch an all-out program of military expenditure or a similar program of public works, a synthetic boom might
quickly ensue.

III

The cold war, indeed, already involves a
costly drain upon our national resources.
More than $16 billion are currently being budgeted for the military. Another $5.6 billion 
are being sent abroad for Marshall Plan assistance. Congress is being presented with an 
additional $1.1 billion request as our initial
contribution to Western Europe rearmament.
Altogether our aggregate outlay, to be associated with world unrest and disruption, is not
less than $23 billion, This total is exclusive
of the $11 billion required to service the national debt and to pay the mounting cost for
the care of veterans. Wars, past and potentially pending, thus claim a $34 billion total, an 
amount more than three times that required 
for all domestic purposes. That such expenditures *in the military sector have been voted 
with scant attention to economy was suggested by Herbert Hoover, whose report has
accused our military establishment of outright
waste, aggregating $1.5 billion annually I In 
the face of this criticism military leaders
have nevertheless launched effective propaganda for a 70 group air force, The final
total seems more likely to expand than to contract.
Not a few officials are even suggesting that
our principal fault has been our inattention 
to the military needs of the Orient and that
the suitable corrective is a large additional
budget to halt communism in China. Even 
without such additional appropriations, military preparation and European economic assistance will, in 1949, cost about $660 for
every family in the nation. Because of our
tax system and the probability of a federal
deficit during the current year, this burden 
will not, of course, be equally shared.
A military undertaking of this magnitude,
once thoroughly launched, provides a powerful offset against deflationary forces in the
economy. Raw materials, metals, and manpower are drawn from civilian channels. An 
additional export market makes inroads upon 
our food surplus. The nation is not faced 
with the problem of so distributing income
as to enhance living standards, That problem
is solved by military and relief demands which 
extract goods from our stock-piles and factories. Our highly satisfactory national income for 1948 included a considerable measure of employment, thus artificially created.
Looking alone at this aspect of our economy leads one toward the conclusion that the
current recession may be but temporary in 
character. Certainly militarization could conceivably (at a theoretical extreme) reach a
point where we were all starving while armed 
to the teeth and fully employed. Moreover,
quite apart from this factor, inflationary forces
have by no means been eradicated from our
economic system. We have not, for example,
saturated the automobile or housing markets.
Buying on the installment plan advanced by 
$3 billion in 1948 but has not reached the potential total. Home buying has raised mortgage
debt by nearly $4 billion but here again the
possibility for runaway real estate speculation 
is not wholly absent. The current mood of
caution and restraint might quickly evaporate
in the face of another marked increase in building prices.
There are other inflationary forces which 
should not be too lightly dismissed. One is the
potential effect of additional non-military governmental expenditures, though it seems unlikely that social welfare, housing, health, and 
educational costs will be markedly increased in 
the current Congress. Substantial rent advances are to be permitted many owners.
Additional veterans¡¯ pensions appear a real
probability even though more limited in scope
than Representative John Rankin proposed.
Government loans on housing and subsidies
for agriculture may, under similar pressure,
so prop the price structure that any downward 
trend might be reversed. After all, the federal
authorities have a wide range on instruments
which they may employ: debt policies, subsidies, utility rate controls, and stock-piling.
The strong, concerted program on both the
military and non-military fronts might readily 
confront us once again with the menace of
inflation.
The Council of Economic Advisers, which 
at the year¡¯s end proposed allocations and 
stand-by price controls as well as support for
agriculture, has clung to its belief in the Presidential Stabilisation Program. Its chairman,
Dr, E, G. Nourse, on April 5,1949, cautioned 
military leaders that military trends in our
economy could go too far. He pointed out that
the upswing of last summer was consequent
upon the $3 billion of added military budget.
When the 1949 presidential budget of $15.8 
billion was proposed for the military establishment and the stock-piling of scarce materials, the downward pressures were not as
great as they now are. He added the following significant comment:

President Truman, in scaling the several parts 
of his executive budget, carefully weighed the
needs of military security and European reconstruction against the strong claims of ''Domestic 
improvements and welfare." He pointed  out that
we could not spend all that would seem absolutely 
desirable in any one of these directions because
of the relative claims of each of the others..................
To provide even 15 billion dollars for military 
spending, he had to hold down on recommendations 
for maintenance or expansion of the nation¡¯s natural resources and its public plant and limit the
scale of social services for education, health, and
social security?far below the level of his own inclination and strong demand by the people. AH
these deferred civilian needs are still there, ready 
to employ any manpower or block of materials made
available by reduction of preparedness effort, Instead of military spending being needed to cure
or prevent unemployment, as Hitler played it, we
have the confidence of a free people that all the
resources which can safely be spared from armament can be used tinder forward-looking private
enterprise and public enterprise to raise the living
standards of the whole population.
Indicating the great contrast between the
rate of military expenditure and that for civilian purposes, Dr. Nourse asserted that the federal military appropriation each week would 
exceed the annual federal appropriation for
education and in ten days would exceed the
annual federal budget for all slum clearance,
low rent housing, and farm housing. A week¡¯s
military budget would cover the entire cost of
federal public health protection. Mr. Nourse
concluded that if the Atlantic Pact meant anything it meant that our security could, through 
cooperation with other nations, be purchased 
at even lower cost. In other words, that the
Congress should not merely add another billion and a half but should reassign the military supplies to be purchased within the existing 
budget.
This speech did not please the listeners, nor
did it receive acclaim from President Truman.
The current setting is such that the administration may be less disposed toward economy 
than toward securing appropriations which 
will sustain employment and create a state of
full industrial preparedness. Already 800 leading executives are at work on the mobilization 
plans of the National Security Resources
Board, and 1500 will be employed before the
work is complete. This planning procedure
for the mobilization of American industry in 
time of war possesses, from President Truman¡¯s viewpoint, an importance far greater
than the Councii of Economic Advisers, the
staff of which numbers but a small fraction 
of that of the Security Resources Board, We
have indeed today no plan or dream of a plan 
for the mobilization of the nation to attain 
the maximum peace-time production, since
the Council of Economic Advisers has generally been unwilling to project its studies
beyond the current year. 

IV
Our national economic course need not
proceed on a year to year basis, nor rely upon 
blind fate. We have the instrumentalities
which could, if properly used, steady that
course without employing increasing militarization as a compensating mechanism, If more
expenditures are needed to provide full employment, we have a backlog of $60 billion 
of essential highways to prevent a paralysis
of our transport system. We need $20 or $25 
billion of river and flood control projects and 
at least $10 billion of new schools. This backlog, as presented by the Federal Works
Agency, does not include other highly important outlays which might be budgeted if the
need is to bolster the production, employment,
and price structures. Federal housing and public water systems come to mind.
Another control technique which may be
employed is that of altering tax rates and 
thereby the amount of the federal debt. A
higher tax on corporations would, as George
Soule has pointed out, fit either an inflationary or deflationary situation. ¡°If inflation 
does continue, the tax can yield a budget surplus which will be counter-inflationary. If deflation is in process, profits will shrink, the
yield of the tax will rapidly drop, and the
needed budget deficit will appear.¡± With the
budget deficit financed by bonds sold to banks,
more purchasing power would enter into circulation. The Federal Reserve system can 
likewise employ its extensive powers to assist
in stabilization.
Other methods by which the government
might assist are the proposed stand-by price
controls and allocations, included in President
Truman¡¯s stabilization bill. Or, if deflation 
is to be the problem, well conceived price supports on agriculture would afford a partial
answer. Substantial minimum wages Mould 
blunt the deflationary impact. Social security 
payments are also generally counter-cyclical.
On March 15, 1949, the consumer price
index of the U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics stood at a point less than 3 per cent below
its peak of last September, and 70 per cent
above the pre-war level. It had registered its
first rise in six months due to advances in 
foods, rents, and miscellaneous items. With 
rent control weakened by the Congress, it is
likely that, for the next month or two, its
trend will be upward rather than downward.
As earlier indicated, however, not a few
signs suggest that, in the absence of unexpected wisdom on the part of Congress and 
the administration with reference to appropriations and debt policy, and equally unexpected wisdom on the part of business in voluntarily adjusting its prices downward to expand sales, we may be at the beginning of a
marked decline. Mr. Truman, like Mr. Hoover, may come to be stigmatized by a depression bearing his name. Fortunately, we have
at hand better methods of coping with such a
decline than were available in the 1930's when 
a depression was, in some circles, considered 
an ¡°act of God.¡±
