Czechoslovakia: Moscow¡¯s Reluctant Ally



In the good old pre-1038 days, the Czechs
used to jest that America consists of 48
states and the Republic of Czechoslovakia.
This lusty little land of the Czechs and the
Slovaks was the most ¡°American¡± country
on the European continent. During the inter-war period, it was an oasis of freedom
and tolerance in Central and Eastern Europe. Conceived in the United States where
its blueprint was drafted in Pittsburgh and
its independence proclaimed In Washington on October 18£¬1918?Czechoslovakia
was truly America¡¯s god-child.
Today, despite the alliance with Russia,
America is still ¡°tops¡± with the Czechs. If a
popularity contest were conducted in
Czechoslovakia, the United States would,
undoubtedly rate first and the Soviet Union
a poor second.
Almost every Czechoslovak family has
some relative in America and feels a close
kinship to this country. They are grateful
for the American assistance offered them
through U.N.R.R.A., which totaled 1,343,000
tons of food, clothing and medical supplies,
valued at $270,000,000.
The townspeople of a small community in
Bohemia recently erected a monument to
U.N.R.R.A. It depicted an infant holding a
can of American-made condensed milk!
Besides, America was not a party to the
Munich sell-out. That means a lot to the
Czechs. They are still quite bitter about
the French and the British.
There is a Friends of the United States
organization in Prague, with a sizeable
membership. American movies draw larger
crowds than Soviet films and even the
poorest are regarded as more entertaining
than the propaganda-laden Moscow products. The United States Information Service
in Czechoslovakia is doing a good job, despite its meagre budget of $31,000'a year.
The British are spending $240,000 annually
to keep British culture before the Czech
public. Of the major powers, only Russia
has no information center in Prague. But
then again the Russians don¡¯t need it.
They have the Czech Communist party to
carry the torch for them.
Czechoslovakia is not Yugoslavia nor
Bulgaria. The Czechs are an independent,
freedom-loving people. And the Russians,
realists that they are, know it. Accordingly,
they deport themselves with painstaking
decorum.
If there is an iron curtain around Czechoslovakia, it is almost invisible. The reins-pulling by Moscow is done slickly and by
remote control. This observer saw no Soviet
uniforms on the streets of Prague. The one
Russian diplomatic official he encountered
in a popular caf6 seemed to receive no preferential treatment.
Much of Soviet propaganda pours in
through cultural channels?music, dance,
film festivals. Even the local Communists
are on their best behavior. They try to outbourgeois the bourgeois parties. No rowdy
demonstrations, no red flags. There is not a
leather jacket or an uncreased pair of pants
among them. Oddly enough, the official
color used by them on their propaganda
posters is not red but a sort of azure blue.
The party line in Czechoslovakia at the
moment seems to be ¡°Communism in white
gloves,¡± To quote the sedate Communist
Premier, Klement Gottwald, ¡°The Communist party strives for the realization of
socialism, but in our opinion, the system of
Soviets and the dictatorship of the proletariat is not the only way to socialism. I even
think that such a path to socialism, different from the Soviet example, is not only
possible in our country but that we have
already started on this road.¡±

The Czechs are not entirely taken in by
this. They realize that in this unstable world
there are few things less stable than the
Communist party line, What Premier Gottwald says today may be changed by a telephone call from the Kremlin tomorrow.
The Czech attitude may be summed up as
pro-Russian but anti-Soviet. They are most
thankful to the Russians for the part they
played in liberating the country from the
Nazis. (Frankly, many of them wish it had
been done by the Americans Instead. They
believe that there was some understanding
at Yalta that Prague was to be freed by
the Red army.)
However that may be, the Czechs-?of all
political  hues?look up to Russia as their
big Slav brother and protector. But Sovietism, that¡¯s another matter. What soured the
Czechs on the Soviets was the behavior of
the Soviet army in Czechoslovakia. To this
day, the Czechs still sigh, ¡±Liberate us from
such liberators.¡±

Soviet Occupation

The Red army men treated Czechoslovakia as an occupied country, They helped
themselves?with or without official sanction?to everything they could lay their
hands on. Unaccustomed to Western ways,
they regarded every worker wearing a tie
as a burzhul and class enemy. The best
break for the Communist cause in Czechoslovakia was Russia's withdrawal of her
¡°Communist¡± troops from the country.
(If you ask a Czech child to say something in Russian, he
¡¯ll invariably reply:
Davai chasl?"Give me your watch,¡± At a
cinema in Prague, a newsreel was flashed
showing Benes being received by Stalin in
the Kremlin. As the two heads of state
shook hands, some youngster in the audience yelled out, Davai chasi. Everyone In
the theatre roared, to the apparent discomfort of the Communists present.)
Culturally and by tradition, the Czechs
belong to the West. They had always been
the most progressive and prosperous of Slav
nations, Geographically, however, they are
next-door to Russia. And in the world today, geography is the dominant factor.
Geographically, too, the 14,000,000 Czechs
are neighbors of the 70,000,000 Germans. It
will take centuries for the Czechs to forget the Nazi nightmare. During the six and
a half years of occupation, the Nazis murdered more than 250t000. Czechs, Slovaks
and Jews. The country has suffered material damage estimated at $11,500,000,000.
Little wonder, the Czechs fear a rebuilding
of Germany. Rightly or wrongly, they feel
that their best ¡°insurance policy¡± against a
future attack by Germany is an alliance
with Russia. For this reason, they have permitted the Russians to train and equip the
Czech army which in its organization and
armament is patterned on the Soviet design.
On the other hand, the Czechs do not
want to become a ¡°protectorate¡± of Russia.
They like their personal freedom too well.
They had resisted the Hapsburgs, and the
Nazis, and they hope that they can successfully resist the encroachment of the Russians. Being closer geographically to Russia,
the Czechs have a better grasp of Soviet
realities than the peoples of Western Europe and America. The first-hand reports of
the low standard of living, of the police
terror and forced labor in Russia have riot
endeared the Soviet system to them, They
can perceive also the appalling examples of
what happened to their neighbors?Hungary, Poland, Rumania. There is little
danger that the Czechs will willingly yield
to Soviet absorption.
The Marshall. Plan
Most of the Czechs I talked with were
embarrassed by their government¡¯s about-face on the Marshall Plan and expressed the
hope that America realized that it was not
a voluntary decision, The Marshall proposals considerably undermined Communist prestige within the country. To the man
in the street, it was a simple enough proposition, Here is rich America wanting to help
us but the Russians won¡¯t let us accept this help.
No amount of propaganda in the press
could shake that view. The Czech press is
not permitted to criticize Russia but the
censorship does not extend to the criticism
of the local Communists and their policies.
There are no private publications in Czechoslovakia. Every newspaper and magazine
is an ¡°organ¡± of a political party or a government-approved organization.
The Ministry of Information is headed by
a Communist, V. Kopecky, who controls the
supply of newsprint. Understandably, some
slight preference is given the Communist
press. Thus Rude Pravo, the principal Communist organ, is the only standard-size
newspaper in the country. All the others
are tabloids. But those who understand
English or French have access to foreign
publications. On the kiosks in Prague, I saw
copies of most of our national magazines.
How strong are the Communists in Czechoslovakia? In the first national election held
on May 26, 1946, the Communist party won
114 out of the 300 seats in the Constituent
Assembly?almost 40 per cent. The seats
held by other political parties are: National
Socialists (President Benes¡¯
party), 55;
Christian Democrats (Catholic party), 46;
Social Democrats (Socialist party) 37; Slovak Democrats (Slovak Catholic party), 43;
Freedom (liberal Catholic), 3; Labor (Socialist), 2. The last three parties function
only in Slovakia.
On July 3, 1946, Communist chieftain
Element Gottwald assumed the Premiership and formed a 26-member coalition
Cabinet Nine places were given to the
Communists and the rest of the portfolios
apportioned among the National Socialists,
Slovak Democrats, Czech Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats.
Neutral observers believe that if an election were held today, the Communists
would not obtain more than 25 per cent of
the total vote. The Communists apparently
realize that their strength is dwindling. For
this reason, they have expressed themselves
in favor of postponing the May, 1948, elections. The excuse they use is that an election at that time would disrupt the Two-Year Plan.
Economic Situation
Czechoslovakia, with an area of 49,358
square miles (about the size of Louisiana),
is the most industrialized of Eastern European countries. Almost 35 per cent of the
population is engaged in industry, another
35 per cent in agriculture, and the rest
equally distributed among commerce, transportation, public services and professions.
Before the war, Czechoslovakia's principal
customers and suppliers were Germany,
Britain, and the United States. Trade with
Russia was negligible. Today, Russia is the
chief exporter and importer.
On October 24, 1945, a few months after
the liberation of the country, President
Benes signed four decrees covering the governments nationalization program, They
provided for the nationalization?with compensation of individual owners (except
Nazi collaborators)-ìéof all mines, iron and
steel works, natural resources, public utilities, defense industries, commercial banks
and insurance companies.
All told, approximately 65 per cent of
Czechoslovakia's total industrial capacity
was nationalized, As a rule, no plant with
less than 150 employees was nationalized
and few, if any, employing more than 400
workers have not been affected.
There were some abuses In carrying out
the nationalization program. Occasionally,
some small factories located in the same
vicinity would be compelled to merge for
¡°efficiency¡± reasons, then they would be declared nationalized because they jointly
employed more than 300 workers. Then
again the former owners were not always
compensated.
In the early months, more of the nationalized industries operated at a loss than at a
profit. But of late, they are getting out of
the red,
To wipe out the deficits of the nationalized industries, the government adopted on
October 28,1948, a Two-Year Plan. Its overall goal is to raise the production of both
capital and consumer goods 10 per cent
above 1938 by the end of 1948. To this end,
the government is investing $1,397,000,000
in all phases of Czechoslovak economy. The
plan, though supported by all the government parties, is being capitalized by the
Communists as their own idea.
The visitor to Czechoslovakia leaves with
the impression that if the country were left
to its own resources it would unquestionably evolve into a moderate socialist democratic state. But will the Russians leave her
alone?
Withal the Czechs have not lost their
sense of humor. One story that is making
the rounds in Prague is about a Czech official
who was asked what he would do in case
of war between Russia and the United
States.
¡°I would join the Russians,¡± he replied,
¡°Why?¡± demanded his questioner.
¡°Because,¡± he replied, ¡°I would rather
be taken prisoner by the Americans.¡±
