ILYA EHRENBURG'S AMERICA

Translations of Six Articles
Published in Izvestia

When Ilya Ehrenburg, the foremost Soviet journalist, visited this country recently, he wrote at
least one article for an American magazine and was interviewed considerably. These statements for
American consumption were interesting, but we thought it would be much more interesting to see
what he would write about the United States for Russian consumption. A few brief news accounts
quoting from his articles in Izvestia came over the cables to American newspapers, but these gave
no adequate idea of what sort of total picture he was presenting. We have, therefore, secured translations of his articles as they were printed in Izvestia on July 16, 17, 24, and 25, and August 7
and 9, 1946; and we submit them to our readers complete and unabridged (with the exception of
seventeen words which seemed to us possibly libelous) as an exhibit in international relations. (They
embody several paragraphs which correspond almost precisely to what he had written for Collier's,
but these amount to only a fraction of the whole.) This material offers an illuminating counterpart-
or contrast-to the articles by Mr. Fischer and Mr. Lauterbach, which we have been publishing for
American readers, about conditions and people in Russia.-The Editors

CONTEMPORARY Columbuses have little
time and a Constellation takes less
than twenty-four hours to cross the
Atlantic. It is a beautiful and comfortable
machine: the air is conditioned and there
is no pain in the ears even at great heights.
We were given a sheet of instructions
which declared that in the event of a
forced landing in the ocean it was best to
take off one's shoes and jump into a small
rubber boat. This advice did not seem
very tempting to me. I was confused by
the behavior of the hour hand of my
watch. It showed seven o'clock in the
morning; yet we had arrived at midnight
and had been flying all night. We were
still drinking morning tea in European
fashion, and the Americans were going
to bed.
When I climbed out of the plane excited
reporters at once began cross-gquestioning
me as to how I liked America/ What could
I talk about then? The perspicacity of the
customs officials? Or the blindness of the
reporters? f know certain American jour-
nalists have come to Russia with a pre-
pared book on Russia (sometimes in their
heads, sometimes in their portfolios). I
didn't want to be like them; I looked
around attentively and tried to under.
stand what I saw. 
In my time I have traveled a good deal
and have been all over Europe. some-
times thought I had lost the ability to be
amazed. Upon arriving in America I
realized that there was much of which
I had no conception. Everything here is
different-the cities, the trees, and the
customs. The summer here is very hot,
but the 'heat is not European; the air is
damp, as in a hothouse. The olives here
are larger than plums and devoid of taste.
People gesticulate more often with their
legs than with their arms, and in the
theaters spectators who wish to show
approval whistle deafeningly.
MODERNITY cannot be understood without understanding America. Hundreds of odes and pamphlets have been
dedicated to her; she can be exalted or
ridiculed with ease. But this is not merely
a peculiar country, but also a diverse one,
difficult to understand. It is hard to set
forth vivid, often contradictory, impressions in brief notes. Behind the complexity
of technology there is sometimes concealed
spiritual simplicity, and behind this simplicity-unexpected complexity.
I rate American literature very highly.
It is not easy now to find writers in Western Europe equal to Hemingway, Faulkner, Steinbeck, or Caldwell. might venture to add two or three more names.
Right behind them is a vacuum-stories
in illustrated weeklies which are so cheap
and stupid that even the most unexacting
readers in Europe would recoil from them.
There is no intermediate literature here,
just as there are no four- or five-story
houses. The skyscrapers of New York are
justified by geography: this is a huge city
built on small islands. But in any provincial city one may see several skyscrapers
surrounded by thousands of single-story
houses.
At the railway station in Atlanta I was
amazed by the automatic checking booths
which have replaced the cloakroom. You
insert a coin, receive a key, and can lock
up your luggage yourself. I was about to
say to my American companion, "You
know how to make human existence
easier, but before I could speak I noticed
a dark, noisome room marked "For non-
Whites" in which Negroes and mulattoes
were dozing. In the state of Mississippi
I saw the home of a plantation owner. It
had a refrigerator, a washing machine,
a marvelous radio, and wonderful ventilators. The planter calmly explained to
me that black-skinned people aren't people
at all, Neither the radio nor the ventilators
had any reflection on the mental development of this slaveowner.
I stayed in several university towns. In
America a great deal is done to elevate
knowledge to its proper height. I saw
superb libraries and laboratories: I saw
scientists surrounded with attention. But
in Tennessee professors told me they were
not allowed the right to expound the
theory of evolution in the schools: the law
forbids any departure from the biblical
myth of Adam and Eve.
In all American cities there are "lions "
clubs: I was fortunate enough to attend
a luncheon-at such a club in one
Respectable business men assembled there,
each one wearing a tag indicating the
place and nature of his business; luncheons are closely associated with business.
Before those present at the luncheon began
to eat their compotes and mayonnaise and
ham with raisins, the chairman banged
the table with a wooden hammer and
exclaimed: "Greetings, lions!" The middle-aged business men at once rose and
chorused: "Woo-woo-woo-woo.
quailed, but they explained that they
were imitating the lion's roar.
Naturally, the sound-imitations of dealers in suspenders are an innocent affair.
There are worse ideas. A parade of the
Ku Klux Klan recently took place in
Georgia. The members of this supposedly
secret society donned fools' hoods and
took an oath of loyalty to the local fascist
f?hrer, whom they call the "Grand
Dragon." They then swore to hang several
Negroes and kill several freethinkers.
EVERYONE knows that in America
 is surrounded with respect. Apart
from many hundreds of registered churches
and sects there is still another cult-the
dollar. An art critic, after introducing a
young artist to me, reeled off his surname
and then, enunciating precisely, said,
"Three thousand dollars." A master of
ceremonies at a cabaret announced that
eminent visitors were present: an actress,
a senator, and a business man "who has
tripled his capital turnover since the war.",
I attended many dinner meetings with a
program much like this one: first, everybody quickly chews the chicken, then
orators give lengthy speeches; then a
female singer renders a sentimental ballad and finally a pastor takes a collection
for charity. He recites the names of the
liberal donors: "Mr. Smith gave five hundred dollars." Everyone applauds and
Mr. Smith rises and bows.
It is not well known that, along with
brisk business men, there are also many
naive day-dreamers and noble idealists in
America. I met a prominent inventor
who renounced a fortune, fearing that
the machine he invented would deprive
hundreds of thousands of workers of their
bread, I spoke to provincial Utopians
who go without food and sleep, devoting
their money and energy to the fantastic
project of creating a "world government,"
In one town I found a circle of eccentrics
who were convinced that they could
render the atomic bomb harmless with
the aid of Esperanto. Everywhere there
are societies to protect the rights of Ne-
groes. Every year innocent Negroes are
condemned and put to death in the electric
chair, and every year the best people in
America protest against racial barbarism,
Yes, the cult of the dollar does exist in
America, but in America there are also
people who deny themselves a pair of
shoes and tickets to the cinema in order
to send gifts to Yugoslav children,
There is much that is childish in Americans. They are not artificial; they are
frank, curious, and noisy. The oldest part
of America is called New England. Everything in, America is new; everything is
young. In New Orleans, however, houses
built in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries have been preserved in the
French Quarter. Such houses are legion in
Europe and are ignored by even the most
painstaking tourists, But the "Old Quarter" of New Orleans is like Pompeii-
a real center of pilgrimage There is either
an antique shop or a stylized tavern in
almost every house 1 was in New Orleans
on a very sultry day (the tropics are not
far off), and a fire was burning in the
grate of one house to re-create the atmosphere of a bygone epoch. Perspiring
Americans were sitting by the fire drinking
iced water; they wanted to spend several
minutes in an old house. One must remember the age of the country to understand Americans.
PEOPLE here like to wander about. If
I they are sitting in a room, they jump
up from time to time and change seats;
they move readily from city to city and
from state to state. They regard a person
who lives in the place where he was born
as a rarity.
There is nothing more the reverse of
the British character and customs than
the character and customs of the average
American. The Englishman is polite and
phlegmatic; he loves to live out his life in
the home of his grandfather; he orders his
suit of first-quality material, expecting to
wear it, if not until he dies, at least until
the next elections. The American likes
only new clothes. Hardly has he furnished
his apartment than he is looking for
another He never has a suit made to
order; why should he? In any shop he
can find a cheap, well-made suit; can
wear it a little and then throw it out He
will buy a shirt that is not worth washing.
He respects old stones, but loves flashy
new ties-and noise.
The history of the United States is
indeed a new history. I might say, incidentally, that history studied by school
children appears to vary in different
states:/in the North the Southerners are
called "defenders of slavery," and in the
South the Northerners are called "oppressors." Vexed issues here frequently
hide the feeling of history. For the average
American nearly a whole epoch passes
between the morning and evening papers;
he doesn't always remember in the evening exactly what disturbed him in the
morning. One lady told me: "Don't read
this novel. It's not a new one; it came
out two years ago.
I spoke to Professor Einstein about the
campaign now being waged by various
large newspapers against the Soviet Union.,
I pointed to an article which portrayed
the restoration of Stalingrad almost as an
act of "Soviet imperialism." Professor
Einstein answered: "Such articles are
designed for readers who have already
forgotten what Stalingrad is." And he
went on to tell me about a certain African
tribe in which the members were named
after objects or phenomena: "mountain,"
"palm," "dawn," "hawk." When a member of the tribe died, his name became
taboo, and it became necessary to think
up new nouns for these things. Obviously
such a tribe would have neither legends
nor traditions.

II

ANTI-SOVIET ideologists like to depict
our country as a sort of barracks in
which everyone is deprived of individuality. The Soviet reader will be amused
by the surprise of some American editors
who, on seeing us three visitors, said in
amazement: "Why, they don't look much
like one another."
As a matter of fact, I don't know of
any country which has achieved such
perfection in standardization as the United
States. was in dozens of American cities
which were impossible to distinguish from
each other. Every city has its Main Street
-the principal street-with fashion shops,
a cinema, and lighted signs advertising
cigarettes or Coca-Cola. Not a single
American can distinguish Main Street in
one town from Main Street in one of a
hundred, others from a photograph. Naturally, New York has its own distinctive
character, yet Americans usually complain that "New York is not America."
For the inhabitant of Birmingham or St.
Louis, gigantic New York, with its many
different races, is like a headquarters or
a den of freethinkers. The visitor is shaken
by the external appearance of New York.
The architect Le Corbusier called this
city "a catastrophic fairyland." It seems
to me that it can also be called "a fairy-like catastrophe." It has grown exclusively
upward and has become a tall forest of
reinforced concrete. At night it resembles
mountains with lighted huts. It is multi-colored, noisy, and fatiguing it contains
dozens of separate towns-Negro, Jewish,
Italian, Puerto Rican, German, and others. In Chinatown barbers promise on
their placards to remove bruises from the
face without trace. In Negro Harlem
there are "shirt hospitals" and private
pawnshops where torn trousers may be
pawned. On 57th Street dealers sell masterpieces of European art. The wives of
millionaires wander down Fifth Avenue
in beaver coats. New York is the center of
political thought and art. Officially it is
not even the capital of a state but only an
insignificant town. It is, however, the real
capital of America. Two or three other
towns-San Francisco, New Orleans, and
Boston-have preserved their individual
aspects. But the remaining towns are without personality; they are simply aggregations of a given number of Americans.
Trousers, percolators, and armchairs
are standardized, too. I do not say this
reproachfully, for Americans have succeeded in raising the material level of life,
thanks to mass production I think we can
learn something from the Americans: how
to turn out shoes or saucepans quickly and
well. However, almost all luxury articles
in America are imported and a salesman
who wishes to explain why this or that is
expensive says, "But this is imported."
There is a certain depression in such
uniformity: the same houses, the same
furniture, the same crockery; men in
identical suits, women in identical dresses.
But still I do not agree with the European
aesthetes who have ridiculed the standardization in America. Perhaps all the suits
are alike; on the other hand, they are
accessible to all.

MUCH more deplorable is a certain
spiritual standardization. Americans
are fond of speaking about their liberty;
but their views, tastes, emotions, and consequent behavior are regulated from outside. The cinema, for instance, lays down
the standard for beauty, and the papers
supply all the details of the "ideally
shaped" woman. This is the standard of
desire. All American women are guided
by these references in their efforts to resemble some film star, while men fall in
love according to the same references
without noticing it There are no books
with average circulation. Even the most
remarkable book will not be circulated in
more than several thousand copies unless
it has been pronounced worth reading by
some "book club," in which case it will
be published in hundreds of thousands of
copies. Since the average American does
not like to choose, he entrusts the right to
choose to his "club." The press and
cinema de-personalize the ideas of people
who stroll along thousands of Main Streets
in the evening. This forms the key to the
sense of depression which is linked with
leisure in America.
Americans know very well how to earn
money, but they have not yet learned to
spend it. I do not mean that they are
mean; they spend money swiftly and
energetically-but without originality.
They work with much greater talent than
they amuse themselves. I would say that
the gayest times in America are when
townspeople meet nature; on the seashore,
for instance, youth is full of joie-de-vivre.
But in the cinema one is struck by their
drowsiness and torpor, the rare laughter
in response to the most humorous, or
apparently humorous, situations.
There are many drunks, despite the fact
that the sale of strong drink is restricted
in one way or another in the majority of
states. There are "dry" states, those in
which whiskey is rationed, those in which
liquor sales cannot be made on Sunday,
and those in which one may drink sitting
but not standing.
Automobiles in America are wonderful
and numerous, and the average American
loves a car. He used to change his car once
every two or three years. Now he can buy
a car but will not be able to receive it for
six months-an unpleasant reminder that
a terrible war has been raging somewhere
in the world. I understand the love of
Americans for cars. But I do not understand why some of them turn their car
into a home. There are restaurants which
one is not allowed to enter; dinner is
brought out on a tray and people eat in
their cars. There are cinemas outside
towns where people can draw up their cars
in the yard in front of the screen and watch
the films without getting out. Finally, it is
sufficient to take a walk through Central
Park, New York, in the evening to see yet
another purpose of the automobile: it replaces the nuptial bed for lovers. Such
habits make life somewhat mournful, not
because people wear fashionable jackets,
but because underneath these fashionable
jackets there are at times fashionable
feelings.

THE average American in the average
American city will tell you with certainty that he is the freest man in the
world. Why does he pay dearly for electricity? His answer is ready: electricity belongs to private firms and the state has no
right to interfere in the affairs of private
firms-this is liberty. In America there
are private bridges, private roads, and
d private aqueducts. In order to cross the
bridge linking the state of Mississippi with
Louisiana, one has to pay the owner of the
t bridge a dollar and a half. However, the
government and the state do interfere in
the private lives of citizens, and Americans
regard this as quite compatible with their
conception of personal freedom. The police may break into a room in any New
York hotel and, if they find a couple, can
check as to whether they have a marriage
certificate. In order to be married as
quickly as possible, one has to get from the
state of Tennessee to the state of Alabama.
Near the boundary line in Alabama there
are alluring placards-"Get Married Here
Quickly and Cheaply"-posted by private
people who have acquired the right to
perform the marriage ceremony. In order
to get a divorce without unpleasant procedure, the inhabitants of New York state
go to the state of Nevada, where hotel
owners have become quite wealthy. In
order to obtain a quiet glass of whiskey,
an inhabitant of Mississippi must go to
Louisiana. Just across the border of this
state I saw several drinking establishments
called "Last Chance."
In a relatively short time the Americans
have created an astonishing technology. I
saw how swiftly they build skyscrapers,
how well and with what precision they
produce automobiles in Detroit, and how
many inventions they possess which ease
the daily life of man. How can one not
praise American roads, with their cheap
and comfortable roadhouses for motorists
who decide to spend a night on the road?
Some Americans, glancing at the factories,
the excellent bridges of New York, the
automatic restaurants, and the electric
razors, are prepared to believe that the
whole of human culture is concentrated
in America. One journalist in Jackson
said to me: "Rome is a dirty and ugly
city; there is nothing to look at in it-not
a single skyscraper or a good drug store.
After Rome, Jackson seemed to me more
like a capital." How is one to explain to
such a man that the ancient basilicas and
palaces of the Renaissance are worth the
skyscrapers of Jackson, or that, besides
drug stores where cigars, fountain pens,
chewing gum, and even sausages may be
bought, there also exist the mosaics of
Byzantium and the frescoes of Raphael?
The Americans are inadequately acquainted with the rest of the world. They
do not know the history and geography of
the Old World. One group of school children was not able to name to me a single
city in the Soviet Union, Their political
level is just as low. People know the inti-
mate side of the lives of different senators,
but in many states the word "Socialist"
(let alone "Communist") is considered
offensive, American papers frequently
write that the existence of two parties is a
guarantee of genuine democracy. One
might note 1hat no one is capable of explaining where the ideological demarcation line runs between the two parties,
and in what way the Northern Republicans differ from the Southern Democrats.

SOME Europeans have ridiculed America
 for her cult of technology. Now the
same Europeans look to their ridiculed
cousins with servility in the hope of obtaining from them an old car or an out-
dated suit. There is nothing to laugh at
here and nothing to flatter. American
development has proceeded along a different path from the ways of old Europe.
France started almost from the Gothic
cathedral and the troubadours. America
started with automobiles, drug store feeding houses, and gold fever. She swiftly
reached a high level of material culture,
but her spiritual culture is only awakening.
Knowing the intelligence, liveliness, and
energy of the Americans, we have the
right to say that the spiritual culture of this
great people will be great and independent,
Certain changes have taken place in the
political consciousness of the average
American; he is gradually moving away
from the abyss. Roosevelt was surrounded
by people who were honest thinkers, capable of realizing the trend of history, Even
if these people have now been removed (or
have removed themselves), there is still
a trace of the late President's activity.
I observed a beginning of independent
thought, genuine solidarity, and a consciousness of their national mission among
many workers. The era in which they
were led only by demagogues and adventurers is coming to an end. We see
the contributions made to the world by
American scientists, The American writers
are not renegades or salon aesthetes; they
are people connected with the nation,
even though the reading masses don't
read them. in contrast to French writers,
American writers seem to me organic, like
huge trees with tenacious roots, The American cinema has already created genuine,
universal humor; apart from the genius
Chaplin, I will name the Brothers Marx.
The cinema has also created the multiplicity of Disney, real poetry capable of
stirring a man devoid of all lyricism, Finally, there is beauty-uneasy, but indisputable-in the architecture of New York.
The American intelligentsia has been
born. It is still weak and lacks self-confidence; it hides from the illuminated advertisements, from the deafening juke-boxes
in the bars, from ecclesiastical sermons
with references to business firms, and advertisements with quotations from the
Bible. It hides itself in a melancholy which
I will call Chekhovian, sometimes in cynicism and sometimes in Utopianism. But
among the intelligentsia more and more
bold people are appearing. They understand that salvation does not lie in flight
or repulsion or solitude. The spiritual
world of the average American must be
raised to the level of the technology which
surrounds him from the maternity home
to the crematorium.

III

THE Atlantic does not form a political
and essentially illusory frontier, such
as that between Belgium and France or
between Norway and Sweden. Even
American trees differ from European ones,
A dangerous weed is often found in the
gardens here; if you brush your hand
against it, ulcers appear on the skin, Nowhere have I seen such downpours, such
fanatical storms, such tropical heat; nature obviously does not yield to the people
who build skyscrapers.
The former Vice-President of the United
States, Henry Wallace, brought garden
strawberries from Russia and planted
them in his back garden, A did not recognize them; the berries had become very
large and had lost their aroma People
who come here from Europe change
quickly. America knows how to melt hearts
and minds. 
Here you may see papers in all languages-Italian, Polish, Russian, Spanish.
Near Chicago there are regions where
German is spoken exclusively. You can
hear Slavonic speech in the huge auto-
mobile factories of Detroit. In the Italian
quarter of New York you may hear all the
dialects of the Apennine Peninsula; in the
Jewish quarter you may buy salted cucumbers, kalachi, and Russian vodka. There
are a dozen cities in America called London, several Romes, a Petersburg, and
three or four Moscows. Although each
group retains some of its customs, all immigrants soon feel themselves American.

IT WOULD seem that in this country of
diverse races united by patriotism, national equality would prevail However,
America, which never knew feudalism, has
established a racial hierarchy. The aristocracy are the English, Scotch, and Irisi.
After them come the Scandinavians and
Germans, then the French and Slavs;
much lower are the Italians, even lower
still the Jews and Chinese; lower still the
Puerto Ricans, and finally, at the bottom
of the scale, the Negroes.,
In the war against Hitlerism America
played a prominent part; yet racialism
here has a legal standing. When I entered
America I had to fill out a questionnaire
which contained the question: "Race-
White or Colored?" If a person has a
"colored" great-grandfather he is designated as "colored" and is subject to
various restrictions. We were the guests
of the government, and I was often amused
by the thought of the reaction the representatives of the State Department might
have had if Pushkin had come to America.
I met a lawyer in Nashville who spent a
long time trying to persuade me that there
are "inferior and superior races." He reiterated the theories of Rosenberg and other
ideologists of the Third Reich. Then he
showed me the portrait of his brother,
who was killed on the Rhine; he was
proud of his brother, who had perished
in the struggle against racialists.
Anti-Semitism is an ordinary phenomenon to most Americans; it seems quite
natural to them that some institutions accept only Aryans and that certain hotels
do not admit Jews. On the, West Coast
the Chinese are the pariahs. There are
organizations in which Italians are not
accepted as members. The fate of the
Negroes is especially tragic. There are
twelve million of them in the United
States, and it may be said that one out of
every ten Americans is deprived of all
human rights.
Natives of New York like to emphasize
the liberalism of the North-"Our grand-
fathers fought against slavery."/In any
Southern town, on the other hand, you
may see a monument to the soldiers of the
Southern Army This is a monument to
the vanquished, because in the war which
shook America the Southerners were defeated. However, it seemed to me more
than once that these were monuments,
not to the vanquished, but to the victors;
since the South not only preserved the
principles of slavery but was able, in some
degree, to inject them into the North.
Certainly equal rights among the races
exist theoretically in New York. A Negro
may not be-ejected from a restaurant because he is a Negro, but not a single well-ordered American restaurant will admit a
Negro. If it occurs to him to persist, he is
told that the empty tables are reserved. A
Negro cannot rent a room anywhere except in a Negro "ghetto." He may work in
the most different sort of quarters, but he is
obliged to live in Harlem, a Negro city
within a city-dirty and impoverished, unhappy but still gay. New Yorkers amuse
themselves in the cabarets in Harlem. The
Negroes are the best dancers and musicians
in America; they are gifted with a high
sense of rhythm and are not as inherently
mechanical as other Americans. In the
center of New York there are theaters
where Negro troupes perform excellently
and are willingly applauded by the whites.
But if a Negro wants to have a snack in a
restaurant near the theater in which he is
playing, he is calmly evicted.
Real estate speculators have a favorite
trick; they buy a house in a good residential district and settle a Negro in it. The
quarter then becomes taboo immediately,
and all the whites depart. The speculator
then buys the neighboring houses for a
song, moves out the single Negro, and the
section again becomes respectable-and
the houses rise in price.

STILL, in order to understand the place
of the Negro in America, it is essential
to see the South. When we were asked
which part of America we wanted to see,
my fellow-travelers chose California and
Chicago. I wanted to see the Southern
states. Remembering stories I had read
the novels of Steinbeck and Faulkner-I
wanted to find out if reality resembled
literature. Thus, after the skyscrapers of
New York I saw Uncle Tom's Cabin, and
I can say that this cabin has changed
little.
In all the Southern states there is a
"segregation of the races" law. Negroes
are not forbidden to use railroads, but they
must travel in special cars (always overcrowded). In streetcars, seats are set aside
for Negroes in the rear. A car frequently
leaves almost empty while Negroes stand
and wait for the next one, as the seats for
them are occupied. Negroes may not attend meetings of whites, they dare not
enter a church where white people are
praying, and of course they must not
even dream of entering theaters or cinemas
for whites.
The Constitution of the United States
guarantees that all citizens, male and female, have the right to take part in elections. However, the Negroes in the South-
ern states do not possess the right to vote.
In the state of Alabama there are three
million inhabitants, of whom 1,100,000
are Negroes, Among the voters of the
state are 496,000 whites and 4,000 Negroes.
In Birmingham, Alabama, there are 130,000 Negroes who have reached the age of
twenty-one, but the total number of Negro voters is only 1,400/How do the Southern states get around the federal Constitution. There are several ways: one, the poll
tax; another, examinations, The qualified
voter must know and "be able to interpret" the Constitution, Clearly the examiners can cut out many Negroes. Finally,
if the Negroes pay their poll tax, pass the
examination, and go to the voting places,
the guardians of slavery frighten away
the unwanted voters with sturdy clubs.
Obviously they do indeed know how to
"interpret" the Constitution in the Southern states! In the state of Mississippi,
Negroes form half of the population; half
the inhabitants of the state are deprived
of the right to vote. All this is done cynically and is well-known to all Americans
both in the North and the South.
When I was in Mississippi I remembered how certain American journalists
had been indignant when the Yugoslav
National Front government had deprived
about 200,000 people who had aided the
Germans of the right to vote. These same
American journalists consider it quite
natural, however, that millions of American Negroes (among them soldiers who
took part in the war for the freedom of
America) are not allowed to vote. I would
ask a question of my American readers:
which is more fair-to take away the right
to vote from people with black consciences
or with black skins? 
The Northerners know that Negroes in
the South are deprived of political rights,
but they cannot imagine the fearful life
of Southern Negroes. When Sam Grafton,
one of New York's brilliant journalists, 
saw the hovel in which two or three Negro
families made their home, he lost his self-
control. "Is this really possible?" he gasped.
Uncle Sam had met Uncle Tom.
The delta of the Mississippi is made up
of many cotton plantations. The land is
owned by the whites and rented to the
blacks. The tenants must deliver half their
cotton to the landowners; they are also
bound to sell the other half to the same
owners. The sum which the Negroes receive may be spent only in the shops of the
same landlords. This may be legally close
to tenantry, but in reality it is slavery, The
landowner, who is also the purchaser of
the cotton and dealer in shoes, kerosene,
and salt, goes around his plantation shouting at the Negroes, issuing orders, and behaving like a king and a god.
I saw a family which earned $300 in a
year and another which earned $200. The
owner of the plantation on which they
lived said to me that last year had been
"unsuccessful," and that he had earned
only $25,000. I saw one house in which
twenty-three people lived, sleeping side
by side on the floor. How far this is from
the renowned American comfort, the refrigerators, elevators, and chewing gum!
The Mississippi, a broad and bright yellow river, sees grief-the black grief of the
blacks.
I was often told in New York that all
American children under sixteen must go
to school. An illusion. In the South I saw
youths who cannot read, who have not
seen schools, and since early youth have
known only one thing-hard labor. In
super-hygienic America, people are living
in stalls. When births are difficult women
cannot have medical assistance; a visit
from the doctor costs $60, and the yearly
income is only $200. But the slaveowners
smile: "You don't know the Negroes.
They are living in paradise. Of course
they don't need anything more."

IV

IN RECENT years the South has increased
its industry. The gigantic Tennessee
Valley Authority, started under President
Roosevelt, cheapened electric power and
aided the industrialization of certain states.
I visited a metallurgical plant in Birmingham. This was not a cotton plantation,
but the blacks are the slaves in both cases.
In the factories they carry out the heavy
work; they cannot be steel workers, mechanics, or electro-technicians. And the
Negro worker in ferrous metallurgy receives fifteen cents less per hour than his
fellow white worker.
Racialism has penetrated into the thick
of American labor. Many union leaders
tell the white workers that the trouble
does not lie in the greed of white owners,
but in the black skin of famished "competitors." Only in recent years have progressive unions been formed which include
both white and black workers. Other
chauvinistic-or rather, racialist-organizations do not want to admit Negroes to
skilled jobs, and there have been strikes
and pogroms because of this. In the South
Negro workers live separately and in
greater poverty. Solitude hangs over them;
they are the rejected ones,
The chairman of one progressive trade union-a bold and
cultured Negro-told me, with the sagacity which comes from long consciousness
of grief, that never once had a white comrade visited him or asked him to his home.,
The slaveowners of the South assure
you that it is impossible to grant rights to
the Negroes, because they are "devoid of
culture." Personally, I met many educated
Negro scholars in the South-writers, doctors, teachers, lawyers. These Negro members of the intelligentsia form unexpectedly bright spots against the background
of the South, where there are many whites
who, although supplied with varying diplomas, are by nature uncivilized. But it is
worth noting that the slaveowners who
talk hypocritically about the cultural backwardness of the Negroes make every effort
to prevent "colored" people from obtaining
knowledge. This does not mean, however,
at the owners wish to add to the knowledge of whites. The "Democrats" of the
South prefer the knout to the primer. In
the state of Mississippi a teacher receives
six hundred dollars a year-a truly miserable salary. But the situation of black
people is even worse. They are not only
deprived of tolerable living conditions but
also of human dignity. When an inspector
(who is, of course, white) visits a Negro
school, he calls the teacher by his first
name as he would a boy, even if the
teacher is an old, gray-haired Negro-
"Sam," or "Bill." The teacher must address the white inspector with respect,
even if he is a callow youth-"Mr. Smith,"
or "Mr. Davis."
In the state of Alabama all the money
set aside for education has somehow been
released to the whites. To clear their consciences a group of school administrators
summoned a Negro professor and began to
explain to him that the budget was limited,
the money had all been spent, and so on.
The Negro answered: "You are right. The
whites need education even more."
I was in a Negro university where there
are about seven hundred students of both
sexes. They will become doctors, teachers,
and lawyers;/but they will only be able
to help Negroes and teach Negro children. "Colored" professors and students
have no access to the public library. Professor Brady, a chemist of high reputation,
Senator Bilbo, a red-haired demagogue
who attracts hearers with stormy appeals
to "bridle the blacks." Bilbo has proposed
removing all American Negroes to Liberia. The slaveowners would look well
without slaves! However, everyone knows
that this was only said by the Senator
in jest. He is a Senator of the state of Mississippi, where Negroes are no fewer than
whites, and where the whites often shiver
when they think of the mass of destitute,
embittered people who may someday become fed up with singing hallelujah in
expectation of the regular hanging.
Not a few Negroes have been in Europe;
many fought for America against racialist
Germany. They saw that in Paris or Rome
no one looked at them as though they were
plagued, and they returned home with
even greater bitterness. The South is on
the eve of a decisive event: either the owners will yield, or the Negroes-yesterday's
men of the front line-will open the struggle for equality.

I AM convinced that in the end racialism
will be overthrown in America; but it
must be understood that this disease has
penetrated deeply into the mind of the
average American. I did not meet a single
white in the South who was not contaminated with racialism. One of the most
fervent opponents of the slaveowners admitted to me in a frank and intimate conversation: "Yes, I defend the Negroes, but
just the same, for me these are not people.
I was playing yesterday with our Negro
maid's child and found myself thinking
that I was playing, not with a child, but
with a nice puppy." Racialism has infected even the persecuted; I met Negro
anti-Semites and Jews convinced of the
superiority of whites over blacks.
Americans love to drink mixtures of
different liquors. Among the multitude of
cocktails there is one which resembles the
rainbow-yellow, emerald, and red liquors which do not mix in the glass but lie
in multi-colored layers. They are mixed
only in the mouth of the drinker. I could
compare this drink with the racial layers
of America. How strange it is that the idea
of racial "purity" finds fervent supporters
in a country which is strong through the
mixture of different races! Cocktails may
be liked or disliked, but it is difficult to
imagine a bartender preparing a mixture
for a customer who will insist on purity,
organic nature, and maturity in his drink.
I have seen racialists in America defending
the idea of the racial superiority of Americans over other peoples. For what did the
American soldiers die in Normandy and
on the Rhine?
The famous journalist, Walter Lippmann, said that in my article on America I
was criticizing what was easy to criticize
-racial intolerance; Americans them-
selves know about this vice and are happy
to be able to criticize their own vices.
Lippmann says that when we Soviet people are capable of appreciating the merits
of America and criticizing our own faults,
then he, Lippmann, will agree to accept us
as "real people." Yes, I know that the best
people are ashamed of their attitude toward the Negro. But in my opinion doctors are good, not because they treat, but
because they heal. It is no easier for Negroes because Lippmann recognizes Senator Bilbo as an evil and writes articles in
New York, while Bilbo and others , like
him are oppressing Negroes in Mississippi.
As for ourselves, we have never denied the
merits of America, nor have ever hidden
from ourselves or others our own faults.
In America, for instance, there are wonderful telephones; from New York it is
easier to speak by phone to San Francisco
than from Moscow to Tula. In America
there are good passenger planes which fly
from city to city every hour day and night.
Perhaps Lippmann will say that I am limiting myself to praising technology. No, I
have already written that I like American
literature. I think we can learn much from
American writers, American architects,
and even (despite the shattering cheapness
of the average production) from American
cinema producers. We know our own
faults-we criticize our own bureaucracy,
our rudeness, and at times our technical
backwardness-but we do not criticize
just to criticize, but to improve. We have
no slaveowners, and it is not a question
of whether Lippmann recognizes us as a
people, but of whether we recognize racialists and slaveowners as people. I believe
in the great future of America, and I am
convinced that the American nation will
Soon be healed of its most bitter and
shameful ailment.

V

AT NIGHT the roads in America and especially near the cities sparkle with
hundreds of lighted advertisements-Coca-Cola, cigarettes, furniture, candidates for
the Senate, and even the Bible. The different churches and sects advertise their
services-the beauty of the music, the
eloquence of the preacher, and the comfort of the building-extensively in the
press.
If you switch on the radio you will inevitably hear an advertisement for tinned
goods, medicines, or ties in the middle of
symphony music or radio comedies. In
many American cities I saw the following
advertisement: "500,000,000 people are
starving. Be economical. Heinz-57 Varieties." Although I have been able to
acquaint myself with certain peculiarities
of this country, I have still been amazed as
to why human solidarity is preached not
by the government, but by a firm making
sausages and fifty-seven renowned varieties. I voiced my feeling to a chairman of a
Chamber of Commerce. He was surprised
to find I didn't understand such an elementary fact. "If such an appeal were
signed by the government," he explained,
"Americans would not believe it. But
everyone believes Heinz, because it is a
really reliable firm."
The press, radio, and cinema are in the
hands of various reliable and unreliable
firms. The editor of a large provincial
newspaper said to me with a sigh: "Our
independent paper depends entirely on
advertisements. If we were to lose our
advertising, we would not last a week."
The wireless stations are owned by private
firms and also depend upon advertising
for their existence.
I was reminded again of the book I
wrote many years ago about the cinema
"dream factory." The American's desire
to forget and divert himself by day-dreaming in the evening has given birth to a vast
industry; in Hollywood mass dreams are
turned out just as skillfully and quickly
as tinned meat in Chicago, However, the
dream factory is more dangerous than the
I1 hash factory; film producers organize the
spiritual world of the average American,
inculcating him with portable morals and
guiding his thoughts and feelings. The producers may compete with each other
over directors and actresses, but they are
all subordinate to their own internal censorship, the Hays Office, which ruthlessly
cuts out everything that may resemble
free thinking.
Hollywood is a dangerous den for Quakers and slaveowners. Indeed, art claims
its own and scores of talented people work
in Hollywood but they are surrounded
by a wall/Chaplin himself found out
what going against the wall of money
means. The average American is convinced that he is inwardly independent,
and he is terrified by "propaganda." In
actual fact he repeats what he has read in
the paper, heard on the radio, and seen
on the screen. I often had occasion to
meet representatives of the press; I inspected the offices of large papers, and I
learned how public opinion is formed in
them.

How do the huge trusts organize public
opinion? Not by articles, because few
people read them and the readers are in-
credulous. The majority of American
newspapers wrote against Roosevelt, but
the readers preferred Roosevelt to Dewey.
The President's activity was apparent for
all to see, and every American was a competent judge-all the more so as Roosevelt
and his supporters spoke at thousands of
meetings refuting the distortions of the
newspapers. When I said to my American
friends that the press poisoned readers
they usually answered: You over-emphasize the importance of newspapers.
We do not submit to propaganda; we know
how to think independently."
However, in order to think independently, one must know of what one is
thinking. The average American knew
Roosevelt's tax policy, but can he know
exactly what is going on in Iran, Germany,
or Bulgaria? He thinks "independently"
about the distortions which are brought to
him by the first page of the newspaper.
He asks himself whether the Russians are
doing right or wrong in moving their tanks
on Teheran and whether or not the Bulgarians are right in striving to retain the
Greek Rhodopes; he does not know the
data of the problem which he is attempting to solve. He does not suspect that Soviet tanks were never moved to Teheran;
nor that there is not a single Greek in the
Bulgarian Rhodopes.
The papers controlled by the trusts or
by individual magnates of the printed
word occupy themselves in misinforming
people under an appearance of information. They are crafty and pretend to be
objective: for every ten anti-Soviet articles showing that our country allegedly
wishes to swallow the whole world right
up to Guatemala and the Honduras, a
small article is invariably published praising the works of a Soviet botanist or the
skill of Soviet sportswomen. Many papers
publishing monstrous fables about our
country requested me to write something
for them. The misled reader repeats:
"Whatever you may say, our press is the
most objective in the world."
France lives on the Paris press, but the
New York papers do not reach the provinces. Every state has its own large papers
in the cities. Many of the papers belong
to some newspaper trust and are local
publications subordinated to the governing clique in New York. Sometimes two
papers of different views in one town arc
owned by a single person; the papers support different candidates, but in principle
follow the same policy.
The style of American papers is extremely peculiar. The expression "boulevard press' came from France, where it
is well known that journalists do not suffer
from excessive academism I know French
papers well, but was quite amazed when
I became acquainted with the newspapers
here. Indisputably, the music critic of the
New York Times and the financial writer
of the Herald Tribune are erudite and serious journalists, but their articles are not
typical of those in the average American
paper. Far more typical are the articles
of a certain Lyons which are published
daily in fifty newspapers. Lyons' articles
are a collection of brief and slovenly gossip items-who dined with whom and how
many dollars this cost, how Senator X
smiled to actress Y or vice versa. Of course,
gossip is also organized; this has to be
played up, that has to be buried.
A reporter on a large New York paper
went secretly to the tailor who was making
a suit for me. The next day I saw in this
newspaper a photograph of myself trying
on my trousers. The article accompanying the photograph was devoted to the
burning problem of why the "Red writer"
preferred buttons to zippers. When I asked
at a meeting of journalists how newspapers
could print such nonsense, I was told:
"In America there is an interest in people."
On the front page of a Birmingham
newspaper I saw a huge picture of a girl;
I decided that this good-looking individual had either murdered someone or had
married a millionaire. It turned out that
she had merely gone to Hollywood hoping
to become a film star and had there become pregnant. There was nothing else
worthy of note in her history, but just the
same she had hit the front page.
Reporters in general are energetic people but not overeducated. I noted down
several questions which one reporter put
to me and herewith quote them in order:
"Are you wearing an American or a Russian suit? Do the Russian people know
that America helped them in the war?
How do people in Moscow find out the
latest trends on the stock market? Have
you been married long? Why do you have
only one political party in Russia and
not two? Do you get up late? Why do
you want to take possession of Albania?"
I will stipulate, however, that misconceptions occur not only among reporters.
In New Orleans a lady professor of sociology who sat next to me at an official
dinner asked me: "Are you a Red or a
White Russian?"
I am convinced that the American
reader is usually more intelligent than the
newspaper which he reads, but involuntarily he yields to a lot of nonsense. The
day before yesterday he was frightened.to
death by the atom bomb tests. Yesterday,
disillusioned, he was saying that "Gilda"
(the nickname for the bomb) had made a
laughing-stock of herself. Today he is.
struck with emotion by the death of the
goats and pigs which perished in the tests,
since the paper told him in detail that a
memorial would be erected in honor of the
dead animals. He does not even think that
perhaps his children are threatened with
death from some sort of "Gilda."

VI

I TALKED to a farmer in Tennessee-a
peaceful man entirely absorbed in his
cows, which he was milking with the aid of
electric milkers. He told me that the Americans would evidently have to fight the
Russians. The farmer now has infinitely
more free time, and it is not surprising
that he reads the local newspaper from
cover to cover. But this paper, the Knoxville Fournal, each week reports fresh machinations on the part of Soviet Russia. 
In the words of this paper, the Russians
are now "swallowing" Trieste, then "invading" Iran, and then "conquering"
Korea. The poor farmer knows a great
deal more about the milk yield of cows
than he does about geography. Reading the newspaper, he is amazed-what
wicked people these "Reds" are! I don't
doubt that he read the appeal of a certain
"brotherhood" in the Knoxville Journal last
May. The appeal stated that Moscow was
not Moscow at all, but Mesech, mentioned in Psalm 120; that Magog of whom
the prophet Ezekiel speaks is nothing
other than Soviet Russia; and that "it is
essential to destroy the country of the
Communist Magog." All this resembles
delirium, but it is printed in the paper.
I recalled the old Spanish song:
"Some sing of what they know,
Others know of what they sing."
The farmers sing what they know, and
the "brotherhood," the publisher of the
Knoxville paper, various trusts (Hearst
and others), the Southern Democrats, and
the Northern Republicans-these gentlemen know well just exactly what they are
singing.
Americans frequently talk of the "iron
curtain" which is said to fence off the
Soviet Union from the world. I have to
admit that the iron curtain really does
exist and prevents the average American
from seeing what is going on in our country. This curtain is fabricated in America,
in the editorial offices of the newspapers,
in the radio broadcasting stations, and in
the offices of film producers and film distributors.
Many American newspapers daily deceive their readers with "private correspondence." How can the average American test the truth of information about
Hungary or Bulgaria? He does not even
know just exactly where these countries
are. They are far away. I was on the spot
in America, and a great deal of nonsense
was written about me. They wrote, for
example, that I was not traveling alone in
America. A "representative of the GPU"
accompanied me. As a matter of fact, I was
accompanied by a representative of the
State Department (the name for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here) whom the
newspapers transformed into a "secret Soviet agent," Speaking of my visit to America the magazine Time exclaims: "He enjoyed a freedom about which American
correspondents in Moscow frequently but
vainly dream." This is printed on page 70
of Volume 23 of the magazine; in the same
issue on page 30 I read that the American
newspaperman, John Fischer, had been
traveling around alone through the Ukraine
for three months. It is hard to say just
exactly what freedom Mr. John Fischer
dreamt of when he was in the Soviet
Union. Perhaps he was regretting that nobody accompanied him. I, personally, am
greatly indebted to the State Department
for the attention shown me, the more so as
Mr. Nelson, who accompanied me, is a
man of great culture and tact. But how am
I to understand the tirades of Time magazine? If a representative of the Soviet
Ministry of Foreign Affairs accompanies
an American newspaperman, the American journalists scream that they are being deprived of freedom. If a representative of the State Department accompanies
a Soviet journalist, Time magazine writes
that American newspapermen in Moscow
do not dare even to dream of such liberty.
I do not understand such logic, or I fear
that I understand it too well.

WHEN American friends asked me
W what should be done to improve our
mutual relations, I replied: "Set up a
single standard." The reader must not
think that I am proposing that the Americans introduce the metric system; I have
no wish to interfere in their affairs. If
they like having water freeze at 32 degrees
Fahrenheit, that is their business. But a
single standard should be set up in evaluating behavior. Too frequently I saw two
at standards here: one for the virtuous Anglo-
Saxons and another for the dishonorable
"Reds." If the Americans consider Iceland
their base, it is called a "guarantee of security for the entire world"; but if the
Soviet Union does not wish to have states
which neighbor upon it become bases for
an attack upon Russia, this is "Red imperialism." When the Americans are engaged in manufacturing atom bombs, this
is an innocent game like football; but
when Red Army men play football in the
suburbs of Moscow, this is "preparation
for conquering the world."
The American people are kind-hearted
and industrious; they do not want war.
At present the country is rich, particularly
as compared with a Europe ravaged by
war. In Detroit the automobile plants are
working at top speed and still cannot
satisfy all the would-be customers. People
"sign up" for refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and radios. America did not feel the
iron boot of war; inconveniences which
are trifling to a European seem to be great
deprivations here. You will hear amusing
complaints here: "There is little butter
.. . poultry or mutton instead of beef-steak. . . the line for nylon stockings
it is hard to get white shirts, only
colored ones." Here and there strikes are
breaking out; the workers are seeking an
increase in wages to match the rising cost
of living. Demobilized servicemen have
returned. The country reminds one of a
housewarming or of the beginning of the
school year. The people are thinking with
pleasure about tomorrow, which will certainly be better than today. They have
long since forgotten yesterday, and they
are little concerned with the day after
tomorrow. If occasionally someone stops
to think that suddenly a depression and
unemployment may be upon him, he at
once drives away these gloomy thoughts.
These are people who do not want to look
into the future. Many of them have more
than once lived through the transitions
from wealth to poverty and from poverty
to wealth. They have adopted a peculiar
fatalism and take things in their stride.
They do not want a depression and they
do not want war. Newspaper articles about
a "Third World War" make them justly 
indignant. But such articles, talks, and
sermons repeated too often are designed
to accustom the average American to the
idea that a Third World War is inevitable. a
One industrialist, a mortal enemy of the
Soviet Union, told me: "We are not going
to fight. It is not the foreign policy of the
Soviet Union that threatens us, but its
future. We don't want you to raise the
standard of living too high.'" Yes, the men
who lead the anti-Soviet campaign are
fighting against Soviet saucepans, Soviet
garden produce, Soviet prosperity. The explanation of the false and wicked articles
about the Third World War lies in the
internal policy of America.
Local fascists have reared their heads.
They are fighting against progress, against
the traces of Roosevelt's policies, against I
the advanced intelligentsia, against the
workers. The Ku Klux Klan has come to
life. The Southern Democrats, partisans
of slavery, have become disobedient and
are openly breaking with the recent line
of their party. Yesterday's isolationists 
are demanding intervention in European
affairs. The Rightists are preparing energetically for the forthcoming elections, and
it should be admitted that fascism here is
losing no time in preparing for a return
bout.
Many fascists are counting on their German counterparts, shattered but alive.
The German-American Republican
League, whose chairman is a certain Kurt
Mortig, demands that President Truman
"prevent the destruction in the Reich of
six million members of the National Socialist Party." The newspaper, Broom, in
San Diego and the Pioneer News Service
in Chicago are occupied full time in rehabilitating Hitlerism. When you read
their publications, you find it hard to
understand who is on trial in Nuremberg
and who is doing the trying.

WHAT more is there to say? Perhaps
W that enormous sums have been spent
here in the hope of saving the traitor
Mihailovich from execution? Or that General Bor, the leader of the Polish pogromists, was received here with honors?
The energetic managers of the trusts have
no concern with Chetniks or high-born
Poles; they are waging a war against the
American people, and for this war they
are mobilizing all the specters of the
world.
I have told of a conspiracy of evil. I do
not believe in the success of this plot. True,
the average American possesses neither
political maturity nor a knowledge of
Europe. But he has a healthy mind and a
heart. He has not always been well educated, he is poisoned with race prejudice,
and he na?vely worships the paper dollar,
although he hears the pastors in the
churches condemning the cult of the golden calf. Perhaps he is too self-confident.
But he is not a wicked and certainly not a
stupid person. America is growing; I speak
not of skyscrapers but of people. Each year
there are more and more people who are
dimly referred to as "progressive." These
people demand human rights for Negroes,
ridicule prejudices and hypocrisy, condemn support for Franco, desire to uproot
fascism, both in Germany and beyond
its borders, and are passionately interested
in our culture, our books, and our films.
Granted that these people are a minority,
they are a minority which thinks, fights,
and seeks the truth. These people see the
salvation of America not in the fact that
the Russians will have few saucepans but
in each American having, in addition to
saucepans, profound thoughts and true
feelings.
I left many sincere friends in America-
not only personal friends, but friends of
the Soviet people, friends of thought and
conscience. Americans are fond of direct-
ness. I stated frankly what I liked and did
not like in America. Only the sick and impotent should have their feelings spared.
Americans have a super-abundance of
youth and health. Besides, they now have
many European flatterers, eager for loans,
trousers, and canned goods. And the
Americans themselves love to judge-to
judge and condemn. I know that they will
receive my words as the words of a friend.
This great people has great strength and
great will. Its history must be worthy of it.

