Our record in Japan 

Maxwell Stewart 


AMERICANS returning from Japan have given very
different appraisals of our occupation program.
Some few have lent unqualified support to the
widely held opinion in this country that ¡°MacArthur is
doing a good job.¡± Others have been severely critical.
But even the critics will admit that, though the situation
is complex, surprising progress has been made toward
the goals set forth in the Potsdam Declaration.
So far the occupation has been almost exclusively an
American show. The Far Eastern Commission in Washington
and the Allied Control Council in Tokyo have
functioned chiefly as debating societies. Policy has been
formulated by the State, Navy, and War departments in
Washington. It has been administered by MacArthur
and his staff. Because it has been a single-nation affair,
the occupation has been far more efficient in japan
than in Germany. But its exclusively American character
has also led to many blunders: Americans are ill equipped
to understand Japanese psychology and Japanese institutions; too often, the making over of Japanese institutions
along American lines has been interpreted as a ¡°success¡±.
As one tries to assemble unbiased and detailed information
on occupation policy from individuals who have
served under MacArthur, one is immediately struck by
the contradictions in the evidence. It appears, for example,
that although the new Japanese constitution is one of
the most enlightened and democratic in the world, the
new Japanese government is the organic successor to be
old, and power is in practically the same hands as before.
Excellent plans for the elimination of the Zaibatsu exist
on paper, but the great monopolies still wield tremendous
power bellied the scenes, virtually dominating the
Yoshida government. The Japanese government has
been forced to cancel all laws limiting freedom of
speech, thought, or assembly, and union organization has
been encouraged; yet Philip Murray¡¯s New Year¡¯s message
to the Japanese workers was censored to exclude
every reference to democracy. Preliminary steps have
been taken to remove part of Japanese industry as reparations;
simultaneously, the United States has granted
credits for the restoration of important sectors of industry.
The failure to deal adequately with Japan¡¯s economic
crisis threatens such success as= has been achieved in the
political sphere.
Some of these contradictions are the result of the
same dualism that is found in American policy toward
other countries. The original policy directives, drawn
with a view to stamping out militarism, were essentially,
democratic. But the threat of rising communism, though
largely illusory, has led the American military authorities
to take a number of undemocratic steps and to seek
the cooperation of forces which they set out to destroy,
Most of the shortcomings of the occupation, however,
have grown out of the original American decision to
work through the Japanese government. The decision
to retain the emperor and the Japanese governmental
apparatus was made, it will be recalled, despite the misgivings
of the persons who had given the most study (to
the nature of Japanese society. Against their advice, it
was decided that the United States did not have the
trained personnel to administer Japan directly, and that
use of &e existing governmental structure would both
cut the costs of the occupation substantially and contribute to the smoothness of its operation.
Unfortunately, it has also helped keep the Allies from
attaining the primary objectives of the occupation. These
objectives, as specified in the Potsdam Declaration and
the basic directive of the State Department, might be
summarized as (1) destruction of Japanese militarism,
(2) removal of the bars to democracy, (3) creation- of
a stable peace-time economy, democratically organized
and providing a wide distribution of income and of
ownership of the means of production so as to prevent
the resurgence of expansionist policies.

DEMILITARLZATION

The immediate tasks of demobilization and the repatriation
of Japan¡¯s overseas troops and civilians were
carried out smoothly and completely. But the larger
aspects of demilitarization-the purge of militaristic elements
from public life, the reorganization of the educational
system, and the reorientation of Japanese thinking
-have not been attacked with the expected vigor. The
SCAP purge directive was sweeping. It ordered &e Japanese
government to eliminate from public life and from
responsible positions in such private activities as the
press, finance, and business, all war criminals and suspects,
including professional military men and members
of the former secret police, the war-the political fronts,
and jingo-terroristic societies. But the Japanese government
succeeded in mitigating the effects of the order by
procrastination and lax enforcement. SCAP issued its
first purge order on January 4, 1946. The Japanese Cabinet
delayed even preliminary action until February 9,
although a general election was imminent. Enforcement
OP the purge for many categories was put off Until
Mar& 10, and not until November were purge lists
issued covering local officials and leaders of the press,
stage, screen, and radio.
Since some of the most important measures for the
reformation of the Japanese government were initiated
in the early months of 1946, the delay permitted many
officials of the old regime to play a. large role in the reconstruction
of Japan. The Cabinet which was expected
to carry out the purge directive, for example, contained
four ministers who were subsequently barred from office.
Many of the men affected by the terms of the purge
were allowed to retire voluntarily, a concession which
protected their rights to pensions, benefits, and honors and
made it easier for them to return to public life at %
later date. Numerous other violation of the spirit and
letter of the purge directive have occurred, and the occupation
authorities, bearing no administrative authority,
have been unable to do more than Intervene in a few
of the more fragrant cases, such as that of Icharo Hatoyama,
president of the Liberal Party, who would have
become Prime Minister if SCAP had not acted.
Definite progress can be reported in the task of reshaping
the Japanese educational system along democratic
lines. Textbooks have been rewritten to eliminate
the nationalistic myths of Japanese history. Some nationalistic
teachers have been purged, particularly from
the higher posts. Training in judo, fencing, and bayonet
drill has been abolished, but the children continue
to march to and from school in military uniforms, There
is evidence that independent thinking is being encouraged,
even in the lower grades, by means of group
discussion. But few new teachers have been trained, and
the older ones complain that they cannot very well teach
democracy when they have no opportunity to learn what
it is or how it works. In education, more than in any
other field, reforms cannot be imposed from outside.
Encouragement must be given to the development of
progressive teacher groups who can take over when -the
armies of occupation pull out. This development has
scarcely begun.

THE NEW CONSTITUTION

Similar shortcomings may be noted in the political
field. The new constitution is generally regarded as
effectively laying the basis on which a Japanese democracy
could be built, MacArthur himself is largely responsible
for the prevalence of this idea, having called
it ¡±one of the great spiritual reformations of mankind.¡±
As a statement of democratic principles, it is, indeed, a
remarkable document. The trouble is that it is essentially
an American document. In an effort to by-pass the
Four-Power Control Council, with its Soviet delegate,
it was prepared in a few weeks by members of Mac-
Arthur¡¯s staff. The Japanese government not only had no
hand in the final draft but was forced to accept it
abruptly without discussion.
Perhaps the most praiseworthy feature of the new
constitution is its guaranties of civil rights. No fewer 
than thirty-one articles are concerned with the ¡°rights
and duties¡± of the people as free citizens in a free state.
Article 19 declares, for example, that ¡°freedom of
thought and conscience shall Be held inviolable.¡± Article
21 guarantees ¡°freedom of assembly, association, speech,
and press.¡± Encouraged by SCAP directives insisting on
these basic freedoms, the Japanese people were quick
to take advantage of their new opportunities. Demon-
strations were held; new magazines and newspapers were
started, reflecting various political views.
This early spontaneous exercise of the basic freedoms
which we brought ta Japan did not last long. Although
SCAP refused to permit the Japanese government to
exercise censorship, it installed a censorship of its own.
It has also used its control of the allocation of newsprint
to assist the older conservative papers at the expense
of the radical papers which mushroomed 'into existence
in the early days of the occupation. Undoubtedly, the
Japanese people have a great deal more freedom than
they ever had before. Much criticism of the government
still appears in the press. However, the Communist
bogy has caused SCAP to overlook certain violations of
the bill of rights by the Japanese police, even to the use
of force in braking up strikes and popular demonstrations.
Thus the Japanese can hardly be 'blamed if they
fee1 that our interest in the protection of civil rig& is
often merely a pretext for encouraging the spread of
American rather than Soviet ideas.


LABOR AND MONOPOLY


Yet, surprisingly enough, it is in the field of labor
relations hat the greatest progress has been made in
Laying the basis for a functioning democracy. Labor
advisers on MacArthur's staff have acted on the assumption
that the working class constitutes potentially the
strongest support for a democratic regime in Japan. The
upper class is thoroughly militaristic and reactionary;
the middle class is weak; the farm population, although
harshly exploited, is traditionally conservative and indifferent
to politics. Under the encouragement of the
occupation authorities, membership in Japanese labor
unions has risen from less than half a million to approximately
four and a half million. Most of the new
unions have sprung up spontaneously in individual
plants. American influence has been generally constructive,
though eff0rts have been made to force the labor
movement into channels that conform to American experience.
Public demonstrations have been checked; collective
bargaining has been encouraged; political activity
on the part of labor has been held to a minimum even
through labor's political power is badly needed to offset the dominant reactionary influences in the government.
Parallel with the strengthening of labor have been the
efforts of the occupation ta destroy or limit drastically
the power of the great pre-war and war-time industrial
and financial tycoons, the Zaibatsu. On paper, the steps
taken seem impressive. Five of the largest of the Zaibatsu
groups have been forced to dissolve. The former
leadership has been purged. The assets of the wealthiest
families have been converted into ten-year non-negotiable
bands, arm$ a progressive income-tax program to
reduce the wealth and power of individuals in these
great family trusts is projected. Not a11 these measures,
however, have actually been carried out. The absence of
a strong middle class makes it difficult to find purchasers
for the assets taken from the wealthy families. In the
absence of government ownership, which has been rejected
by SCAP as socialistic, no one seems to know how
the Zaibatsu's property can be widely redistributed.
Such success as SCAP ha had in instituting democratic.
reform has been seriously endangered by its
incapacity to deal with the grave economic problems
facing post-war Japan. As in Germany, these
problems are complicated by the fact that a revival
of industry carries the threat of restoring military potential.
Because of &e divergence of views, reparations
policy has not yet taken final form. This delay, In turn,
has delayed presentation of a basic program of economic
reconstruction. Another obstacle has been the Japanese
government's failure to cope with &e inflation. The
rapid and uncontrolled rise in prices has been due largely
to the government's attempt to meet the high costs of
the occupation by printing money-possibly with the
aim of discrediting the occupation. Last year the government
incurred a deficit of 75 billion yen-considerably
more than the costs of the occupation. Currency in
circulation has jumped from 8 billion yen to 122 billion
within twelve months.

Failure TO COMBAT INFLATION

The defects in the administrative 'structure and general
operations of SCAP are forcefully demonstrated by its
failure to combat rising prices. SCAP is specifically
exempt from t1xe responsibility of strengthening the
Japanese economy. But it is clear that. without a strong
economy the whole program of democratization is
doomed to failure. In April, 1946, some of the lesser
experts in several SCAP divisions began to be concerned
about the grave economic maladjustments resulting from
the inflation, but before pressure could be brought to
bear on the Japanese government to set up an adequate
system of industrial allocations and price controls, agreement
had to be reached within SCAP itself. To this end,
a program of education had to be carried on in the
various divisions, up to and including the General Staff.
MacArthur himself had to be convinced of the necessity
of action. So much time was consumed &hat the economic
control board was not established until August, 1946.
At- first, a political hack was placed in charge, and
despite continued demands from the lower levels of
SCAP, no real effort was made to established a system
of controls until late May and June, 1947, when the
Katayma Cabinet took power. By that time, it was generally
agreed that it was too late to check inflation by a
system of industrial controls done. The anti-inflation
program announced by the Cabinet in early J d y was essentially
a retreat, only a basic reconstruction of the
Japanese economy, with adequate taxation and a restoration of export trade, would succeed today in checking the
inflationary spiral. This would require substantial American
financial assistance, which would mean reversing our
original policy. Whether or not such assistance is ultimately
given will not depend primarily on Japan¢®?s needs.
It is more likely to depend on an appraisal of Japan¢®?s
potential importance as an advanced industrial base in
an American-Soviet war.
Thus we are confronted with the supreme paradox
of our occupation policies. The democratic objectives of
the occupation can be achieved only if the Japanese
economy is restored, and the necessary American financial
aid is likely to be forthcoming only as a means
of building up Japan as a bulwark against Russia. But
if Japan is to be developed as an anti-Communist outpost,
the occupation authorities must seek support, not
from labor and other democratic elements, but from the
reactionary military groups that they at first wished to
destroy.
Although the effect of this paradox is clearly discernible
in cur occupation policies, the record to date is
not on the whole a bad one. For the most part, the
original goals of the occupation have been kept in sight.
Despite many blunders, substantial progress has been
made in most areas. However, the task of displacing the
firmly intrenched way of life of old Japan is a gigantic
one and has scarcely been begun. There is much to be -
said at this stage for placing this responsibility on the
United Nations, for as long as &e United States has, in
effect, full power, our policies will inevitably reflect
American imperialist interests. General MacArthur has
expressed a desire to turn over the administration of he
occupation to the U. N. If this is done before the American
nationalistic impact becomes too pronounced, the
high esteem in which MacArthur is held, both in this
country and in Japan, may be confirmed by history. But 1
most thoughtful observers will suspend judgement until
it becomes apparent whether the seeds of democracy
which have been sown are to be permitted to mature.
