Our Secret Deal over Germany

Albert L. Warner

Why, in the summer of 1945, did our troops march back over 150 miles of
European territory they had taken by arms-and blood-and let the Russians
walk in? Here is the story of one of our most disastrous postwar blunders.

Marked “secret”, its contents refused to inquirers, there lies in the files of
State and Army departments a document
which might have vastly improved
the postwar political and military
situation for the Western world. It is a proposal
made by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in February, 1944,
for Western zones of occupation in Germany which
would have extended clear to Berlin, 100 to 150 miles
east of the present zonal boundaries with Russia.
The State Department turned a cold shoulder to
this proposal. The War Department failed to follow
it up. American Ambassador John G. Winant in
London, carrying on the occupation negotiations,
actively opposed it. And President Roosevelt, placing
no significance on the location of the East-West
line, gave it a final burial.
What may have been the most important
"treaty" of the war period-the basic agreement
reached in London in the fall of 1944 arranging for
the German occupation zones-has never been
textuallly published. IL also is still secret, with access
to it refused. It was signed by Britain and
Russia as well as the United States. There is nothing
in it that is not known to Moscow, but the document
is denied to the American public.
This London pact was to determine where Germany
was to be partitioned for an indefinitely protracted
and critical period and where The Iron Curtain
was to fall. It was perhaps more important than
any agreement reached at Yalta. In the case of
Eastern Europe and the Far East, Russia was in a
position to take, whether or notwe gave. It was
physically occupying Eastern Europe. It doubtless
would have invaded Manchuria and seized spoils
from Japan and China even if we had not invited
it to the feast.
To be sure, we were an accessory there to international
immorality and a proponent of shortsighted
policy. But in the case of the German occupation
zones, the London agreement was UJ give up to
Russia territory of the highest strategic value which
it was not occupying when the war ended and which
it could not have Bei/ed. It was a gift to Russia that
left the Western city of Berlin an island behind the
Soviet tine, yielded Leipzig in the heart of Germany
to the Russians, put the Soviets within a 100-mile
stroke of the Rhine end the industrial Ruhr, and
established them at the very base of the Danish
peninsula. One push and Denmark could be in
Russian hands, loosing Soviet submarines from the
Baltic and affording a base for the rocket bombing
of Britain.
This is the story of how these occupation boundaries
in Germany were created.
The Moscow Conference of October, 1943, agreed
on American-British-Russian planning for the postwar
control of Germany. This work was entrusted
to a European Advisory Commission (EAC). At
Teheran, its member? were Ambassador Winant for
the United States, a kindly, dreamy-eyed, idealistic
gentleman; Fedor Gusev, the Soviet ambassador
to London, a square-headed, tight-lipped diplomat;
and Sir William Strang, a s harp-featured bespectacled
Britisher. This commission began work in
London in December, 1943.
Ill Washington, s Working Security Committee
(WSC), representing State, War and Navy, was set
up to consider postwar Germany and to advise
Ambassador Winant. James C. Dunn, now ambassador
to France, was chairman, but, because of
other duties, rarely attended meetings. War and
Navy departments each had one representative, the
State Department usually half a dozen.
Recollections from the very outset clash. State
Department spokesmen lay blame on the War Department,
and vice versa. Prof. Philip E. Mosely,
of Columbia University, since 1951 bead of its
Russian Institute, who was in the State Deportment
and became a political adviser to Ambassador
Winant has told in scholarly fashion in Foreign
Affairs, July, 1950, that the Civil Affairs Division
of the War Department at first refused to take part
in discussing occupation zones and insisted they
were purely a military matter to be decided by the
military. Even when this deadlock was broken, Mr.
Mosely says the wrangling continued and Winant,
could get no Instructions for many weeks.
A State Department study at once envisioned
joint three-power control of Berlin, but with Berlin
well behind the Russian zonal boundary. Mr.
Mosely says that be himself early proposed informally
a corridor to link the Western areas of
occupation with the German capital. Again be says
members of the War Department balked his reasonable
proposal by insisting it was all a trespass on
a field wherein the military should have the decision
"at the proper time."
He stale9 the War Department people also implied
an expectation that the Russians would be all
the way to the Rhine by the lime of Germany's
defeat and it would be useless to expect the Russians
to carry out an agreement which would take them
backward in Germany,
Maj. Gen. John Hilldring, retired, who was head
of the War Department's Civil Affairs Division, has
a different recollection. He tells me it was the State
Department itself which had the responsibility for
advising Winant. The WSC group was purely consultative.
Nor was there any prolonged controversy
between War and State over EAC policy, he declares.
The Weir Department did insist that EAC
functions should lie defined in writing.
"No one ever entertained the idea," says Hildring,
"that the Russians would get to the Rhine before
Eisenhower's forces. Anyone in Operations who
had had any such idea would not have lasted five
minutes. The objective of Overlord (the invasion of
the continent) was Berlin, and in my two years on
the General Staff I never heard anyone even breathe
a doubt that Eisenhower would reach his objective."
In these studies five months before the landings in
France one natural question was where the Russian
and Western troops were likely to be at the end of
hostilities. Another consideration was to simplify
administration by following the lines of German
provinces, thus using established local government.
At the War Department there was some talk
about giving each of the three major allies a third
of the soil of Germany or a third of the population.
There were some who suggested that instead of
putting Russia in the East and Britain and the
United States in the West, there should he parallel
zones running east and west across Germany, with
the Soviets in the center.
Similar discussions were held in the WSC group,
but it never proposed any definite zonal boundaries
nor did it ever receive from Winant any boundaries
for approval.
Suddenly the British Foreign Office, in January,
1944, proposed to Winant and Gusev an occupation
diagram that is substantially the one in existence
today. Here the usual political foresightedness of
Winston Churchill was not in evidence. For all l\i©¬
boldness, Churchill was always cautious in assessing
the pace of military success in an invasion of the
continent. General Eisenhower tells of Churchill
saying that if by the winter of 1944-45 the Western
allies were firmly on the continent, with Cherbourg
and Brittany in their grasp, it would be a great success.
Eisenhower insisted, as proved to be correct,
that by winter the allied forces would be on the
border of Germany itself.
To James Forrestal, Eisenhower commented that
one gap in Churchill's thinking involved the effectiveness
of the use of air power in smashing enemy
resistance and exploiting a break-through. Therefore
Churchill thought that the projected zonal
boundary with Russia in Germany was far enough
east to be of considerable advantage to the Western
allies, considering the rate of military advance
which he projected.
The British made their proposal without consulting
the United States. Although the two countries
had been working in closest military alliance, the White
House gospel to American officials in
political matters was to avoid giving
Russia the slightest cause for thinking
we were ganging up with Britain. Politically
we were not to act jointly with
Britain. The unilateral British plan on
zones was our recompense.
Britain proposed that it occupy the
northwestern zone of Germany because
of its proximity and the fact that British
troops would be in the northern
sector. The United States would get
the southern zone. It was this feature
which seized President RooBevelt's
attention rather than the line which
WEIS to divide RUssia from the Western
allies.
From then until the Quebec Conference
the following September, 1944,
Washington practically ignored the
Russian line and quarreled lustily with
London on this other phantom issue.
Britain would be getting the industry
of Germany, so the argument
ran; we would be getting the scenery.
Particularly we wanted the north zone
with its ports for supply purposes.
John J. McCloy, who was then
Assistant Secretary of War, recalls for
me that Mr. Roosevelt was also influenced
by the conviction that there
would be a great revolution in France
at the end of the war. "He was afraid
that the road from Central Germany
through France might be blocked.
Therefore he wanted the American
troops generally clustered around the
porta or within easy access of northenm
seaports."
Mr. McCloy impressed on the President
that even if there were trouble in
France, our troops could be evacuated
easily enough through Mediterranean
ports from Southern Germany.
But Buch was the Rooseveltian determination
that Secretary of War
Stimson set down his own discomfiture
in his diary: "It will only get us into a
head-on collision with the British."
Just as this entirely misleading issue
began to be raised, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, near the end of February, 1944,
made their effort on the more fundamental
point. They prepared a memorandum
with a sketch for zones which
would focus on Berlin. The line between
the Russian zone and the Western
zones, Mosely recalls for me, would
run roughly from Rostock on the Baltic
to Berlin to Leipzig and to Asch on
the Czechoslovak border. Berlin would
not be an isolated island far within
the Russian occupation area.
As one looks back now on this proposal,
its advantages are obvious. We
would not be at the mercy of the Russians
for access to Berlin, subject as
we are right now to harassing dangerous
squeeze plays. There would have
been no Berlin blockade. Our troops in
Berlin would not be virtual hostages,
subject to capture immediately upon
outbreak of war. A substantially larger
part of Germany would be in the
Western occupation, thus increasing
the authority of West Germany. From
a military position, the West would be
infinitely better off. It would have a
cushion within which to meet a Soviet
blow. That would give the Germans
themselves more of a sense of security
and make them more willing to throw
in their military lot with the West.
This document was carried to the
Working Security Committee by Col.
Edgar P. Allen, the War Department
representative. Mr. Mosely says the
document was represented to be what
President Roosevelt wanted. Mr. Allen
does not recall saying this, but thinks
all papers of this nature from the
Joint Chiefs went through the White
House. General Hilldring is sure the
President was never mentioned in connection
with this proposal.
The State Department received the
document with icy apathy. Allen insisted
that it be sent to Winant. This
the State Department did, but, significantly,
without recommendation.
Winant and his staff were in a vexed
quandary. He asked Washington for a
supporting argument and didn't get it.
In London EJI kinds of objections to the
proposal were raised. A few days
earlier the Russians had accepted the
British proposal on zones. They assuredly,it was argued, would not accept
this suggestion now from the
Joint Chiefs that would give them
control of a good deal less of Germany.
And to press the proposal would
jeopardize the harmonious diplomatic
relations with Russia which were being
so painfully nurtured. Furthermore
the proposed east-west line would cut
across existing German provinces and
therefore hamper the local administration
of Germany by occupation authorities.
Even the more hardheaded, like
Mosely, felt that the American military
had BO long delayed their proposal, letting
Britain and Russia step in ahead,
that the plan was not feasible.
Those who thought the British
proposal was reasonable pointed out
that Russia would be occupying not
over one half the area of 1937 Germany.
(The Soviet subsequently turned
over part of this to Poland.) In this
area lived 36 per cent of the German
population of 1939. Six per cent more
lived in what was to be the jointly
administered Berlin area.
Against these considerations of what
would be generous to Russia it might
have been argued that Berlin was distinctly a Western city and a natural
meeting ground for the East and West
forces. Even if Russia were to stop
there, a very substantial slice of industrial
and agricultural Germany
running from East Prussia to Berlin
would be under Soviet occupation.
Russian penetration aa far as Berlin
would also mean Soviet influence and
control over all the intervening countries
of Eastern Europe.
When postwar control of Germany
was first suggested at Moscow (back
in 1943) there was no Soviet antipathy
to the idea of Berlin aa a meeting place.
Maj. Gen. John R. Deane, then head
of the American Military Mission in
Moscow, proposed s banquet toast to
the day when Western and Red Army
forces should come together in the
streets of Berlin. Marshal Stalin sprang
from his chair, walked around the entire
table and drank a separate toast
with Deane on that delightful vision.
But the disconcerting fact is that on
the Chiefs of Staff proposal the War Department did not push the State
Department. State sympathized with
Winant. And Winant never went into
a bargaining session, never even suggested
to the Russians the Berlin
boundary line.
Instead, in April he sent George F,
Kennan, now ambassador to Russia, to
the White House. They discussed
various German problems. The President
waved aside the Joint Chiefs' proposal
and agreed to the zones that had
been suggested by the British, The die
was cast. Stalin was to be invited far
west of Berlin whether be got there by
arms or not. Genghis Khan never bad
it BO good.
But Roosevelt insisted, with-that
same fixation, on American instead of
British occupation of the northwestern
zone. When he finally gave up the idea
at the Quebec Conference, it may have
been in return for British acceptance of
the Morgenthau Plan for converting
Germany into a pastoral nation-a
scheme for assuring poverty and communism
in Western Europe, which the
President fortunately was induced later
to abandon.
Winant now had a bit more guidance
to continue his negotiations over
Germany. It is an illuminating comment
on his tactics that one fellow
diplomat remembers Winant as being
happiest when he was able to say one
day, "I think I have finally convinced
Gusev of my integrity and sincerity
of purpose." Winant’s skeptical associate
thought to himself that the
Russians were glad to credit integrity
to anyone who let them take home
the bacon.
But it must be remembered that it
was a time of great admiration for the
fight which the Russians were making
on the battlefields and of lively hope
that Western generosity would induce
Russia to postwar co-operation.
There remained the matter of an
isolated Berlin in which an Allied Control
Council for Germany was to function.
Mosely. who was one of the few
to think seriously about this matter,
says Winant went to Washington in
May of 1944 and there argued the
necessity of getting specific access to
Berlin, But the weight of testimony is
against the idea that Winant was urgent.
General Hilldring says Winant
did not take up the matter with him,
but did discuss it with Mr. McCloy
and the Army Operations chief and
there was agreement that access to
Berlin should be provided for. Hilldring
does not understand why Winant
did not clear up the matter of access to
Berlin in the twelve months remaining
before V-J Day.
Winant called on Roosevelt, but the
matter of zonal lines and access to Berlin was apparently so little emphasized
that Admiral William D. Leahy, the
President's Chief of Staff, finds in bis
notes a reference only to Winant's discussion
of British politics. Gen. Lucius
Clay reports that Winant believed our
right to be in Berlin carried with it the
right of access and that ii would only
confuse the issue to raise it in connection
with the occupation agreement.
Winant, he said, felt it would arouse
Soviet suspicion and make mutual understanding
more difficult,
Robert Murphy, now ambassador to
Japan, who was with Winant in London
for a while, informs me be saw no
indication that Winant was pressing
for a corridor or definite access to Berlin.
He thinks Winant had the idea
that, once established in Berlin, our
ingress and egress would be a natural
corollary.
During this period Winant frequently
by-passed the State Department and
communicated by Navy code directly
with the White House, It is true he
served as a channel for direct exchanges
between Churchill and Roosevelt, but
some State Department officials are
thus able to say that the occupation-
zone agreement, written in September
with amendments in November, was a
White House, not a State Department
affair. It was " Roosevelt's private
treaty."
Thu Yalta Conference in February,
1945. confirmed the occupation lines.
Britain and the United States favored
giving a zone to France. Stalin was
cool, but said it was all right with him,
po long as they carved the French areas
out of the Western zone.
The zonal lines were distinctly a
political decision in which General
Eisenhower had no effective voice. In
January, 1944, he told Roosevelt he
opposed dividing Germany into national
sectors and proposed a joint
occupation of all Germany. This idea
got nowhere. When zones were decided
upon, he felt the political chiefs should
have insisted upon a bigger area for the
West. A natural geographic line he
thought would be that of the Elbe
River, which would have placed Leipzig
and an important area of Central
Germany in Western hands.
A footnote on the trend of affairs is
the energy with which Americans made

sure they would have a corridor from
the American zone in Germany across
the British zone to Bremen and the
docks of Bremerhaven, which the British
conceded as an American supply
point. Admiral Harold R. Stark, commanding
American naval forces in Europe,
rightfully did his duty, insisting
to the British, "I want it all tied down.
I want it all in writing." But no one
got around to asking anything in writing
from the Russians as to access to
Berlin.
As the final drives against Germany
opened in 1945, the political decision
on occupation zones had been made,
but military decisions were yet to be
taken. In the final days of the war,
Winston Churchill, again bold and farsighted,
twice sought to intervene, and
was twice rebuffed.
In March, as the Russians were
pounding toward Berlin from the east
and the Western allies were crossing
the Rhine, Eisenhower considered the
question of sending troops into Berlin.
At staff headquarters, Robert Murphy,
as political adviser, spoke up stoutly
for such a move. It would be vital in
our relations with the Germane, the
Russians and Europe generally. Eisenhower
acknowledged the possibility of
favorable political impact, but he raised
three questions: Would a race to Berlin
in the final days of war he worth the
extra casualties? Was it not militarily
advisable to assure the early end of the
war by mopping up the Germans in the
north and pushing his main force to
South Central Germany to suppress
the reported Nazi effort to establish a
last stand, a national redoubt, in the
Bavarian mountains? (Such a stand
never materialized. Allied intelligence
bad vastly magnified Nazi plans and
capacity at that moment.)
Finally Eisenhower raised the question:
Had not the political decision already
been made? What was the use of
casting aside these other considerations
in order to fight into Berlin, when we
would have to fall back in a few days to
the zone lines? General Omar N.
Bradley estimated that a breakthrough
to Berlin might cost 100,000 casualties-
"a pretty stiff price to pay for a prestige
objective." He thought there was
more important work to do in destroying
the remaining elements of the
German Army.
At this point Mr. Churchill stepped
in. He supported British Marshal Montgomery's
plan for a drive by British
forced with American aid to Berlin. He
was disturbed that Eisenhower, in order
to regularize the military program
and avoid incidents with the Russians,
had notified Stalin that the allies proposed
to stop at the Elbe River. On
April first, Churchill took up the matter
with Roosevelt. The Russians were
in a position to overrun Austria and
take Vienna, Churchill said, adding, "If
they also take Berlin, will not their impression
that they have been the overwhelming
contributor to the common
victory be unduly imprinted in their
minds, and may this not lead them into
a mood which will raise grave and formidable
difficulties in their future?"
Mr. Roosevelt rejected the Churchill
argument and said that Eisenhower's
plans were in accord with earlier allied
strategic decisions. On April seventh,
Eisenhower, in a message to the Combined
Chiefs of Staff, said it was militarily
unsound to make Berlin a major
objective, but, he said, " I am the first
to admit that a war is waged in pursuance
of political aims, and if the
Combined Chiefs of Staff should decide
that the allied effort to take Berlin
outweighs purely military considerations
in this theater, I would cheerfully
readjust my plans and my thinking so
as to carry out Buch an operation."
He got no instructions to change.
Again, near the end of April, the
British Chiefs of Staff pointed to the
political advantage of liberating Prague,
the capital of Czechoslovakia, Gen.
George C. Marshall, United State?
Army Chief of Staff, commented, "I
would he loath to hazard American
lives for purely political purposes. "
By the beginning of May, General
Patton's army had penetrated into
Czechoslovakia and was ready and able
to liberate Prague. But the Russians
asked a halt and Eisenhower agreed.
On May sixth Czechoslovak representatives
asked for aid. On May seventh
Churchill proposed an advance on
Prague. But Eisenhower continued to
honor the Russian request. The salty
expletives of General Patton still ring in
the memories of those around him at
the time.
Mr. Churchill made one other sortie,
proposing to President Truman that
Western troops should not withdraw to
the zonal line unless Stalin would agree
to the pooling of all German food resources.
Mr. Winant, shocked at the
idea of annoying Russia and destroying
"mutual confidence," protested.
Mr, Truman held that retirement of
troops to their allotted frontiers should
not be used for such bargaining.
The British continued to press for
keeping the Western troops where they
were at the end of hostilities until
Russia had better clarified its postwar
attitude. But Eisenhower took the position that the political leaders had
made their political agreement and
that to start off our first direct association
with Russia by refusing to carry
out the arrangement would wreck the
whole co-operative attempt at its very
beginning.
By now the Russians were pushing
hard. At a preliminary meeting of the
Allied Control Council in Berlin in
early June they demanded that the Western
troops fall back to their zone line,
and wanted it done within twenty-four
hours, as Mr. Murphy remembers it.
Even at this late date we might
have at least demanded definite means
of access to Berlin as a condition of our
withdrawal into zonal areas. Genera]
Clay, who was in charge of government
administration under Eisenhower,
agree? that he made a mistake in not
insisting. "But I did not want an
agreement in writing which established
anything less than the right of unrestricted
access,"
Mr. Roosevelt had envisioned a brief
American occupation of Germany?
"two years at the outside," he said at
Yalta-in cordial partnership with
Russia. His subordinates accordingly
had thought not so much in terms of
what we could control but how little
we would be responsible for in the way
of main ta in in g order and re-establishing
the German economy. They had just
not foreseen Russian hostility to us
within Germany.
Mr, McCloy, who, as United States
High Commissioner to Germany, was
later to struggle with the problem of
no corridor or no completely free means
of entry to Berlin, sadly remarks, "Any
number of people should have thought
of this situation irrespective of their
particular responsibility. It is explicable
that no one did. If anyone did
think of it, be certainly held his
peace I certainly wish I had thought
of it and had taken some responsibility,
even if I didn't have it. I think the
same thing can be said of all those who
were in any way involved with the situation
of our troops in Europe or our
over-all European policy, and I include
the President, the Chief of Staff, Eisenhower,
Clay, Somervell, the Secretary
of State, the Secretary of War, as well
as lesser fry."
Not so quickly as the Russians demanded,
but with promptness, the
Western troops were withdrawn- trekking
backward over those 150 miles of
territory they bad conquered and letting
the Russians roll in to a position
100 miles from the Rhine.
Russia could and thenceforth did
proclaim to Europe that by its might
alone it had liberated Prague and the
Czechoslovak people and captured Berlin,
twin symbols of the crushing of the
Nazi power.
But the political chiefs had made
their strange decision a year earlier.
American military men had been trained
to defer to civilian leaders; they concentrated
only on military ends.
One especially curious feature of
that strange decision on the East-West
boundary line was that the original
initiative for it came from the experienced,
astute British Foreign Office,
with the concurrence of the clairvoyant
and almost always aggressive Winston
Churchill.
It is odd also that after eight years
have passed, the two key documents in
official American files relating to the
negotiation of zones of occupation are
still ruled secret, prohibit43d to investigators
and labeled, " Not in the Public
Domain."
On November 3, 1947, Mr. Winant
committed suicide. There is nothing to
indicate that he ever felt be had been
less than wise and dutiful in his London
negotiations. But the collapse of his
dream of postwar harmony weighed
heavily upon him.

