Our Ally, Russia

ON THURSDAY, September 18, I flew into the Soviet
Union over the Caspian Sea, across the salt, red mud
flats at the delta of the Ural River, and up to the Volga
River at Kuibishev. I left Russia ten days later, flying down
the Ili River along the old silk route to China from Tashkent
in central Asia. Later, on the way home from China,
our plane again made three landings in Russia, in Siberia .
I was in Russia a total of only two weeks . I had never
been there before . I do not speak a word of Russian, but I
had Americans with me to act as interpreters . I had read a
great deal about the Soviet Union, but nothing I had read
had ever given me a very clear picture of what was going
on in that vast country . Finally, I suspected before I went
to Russia, and became more and more certain as I stayed
there, that the country is so vast and the change it has gone
through so complicated that only a lifetime of study and a
shelfful of books could begin to tell the whole truth about
the Soviet Union .
It is true, and worth reporting, that the Soviet government
gave me every chance to find out what I wanted to
learn. It permitted me to examine in my own way its industrial
and war plants, its collective farms, its schools, its
libraries, its hospitals, its war front . I came and went as
freely as though I had been making a similar trip through
the United States, and I asked questions-unexpected questions
of unexpected people-without limit or interference,
and always in the presence of an American who understood
and spoke Russian .
A visitor for the first time to Russia inevitably reflects
now and then upon the past . One late afternoon in Kuibishev
I found myself thinking of pre-revolutionary times. I
walked alone to the edge of the steep bank on the western
side of the Volga and sat on a park bench looking down at
the river. The government had given us a Red Army rest
home right at the river's edge . There was a biting cold
already in the air, but the leaves were still on the trees .
Along the bank stretched small, unpainted dachas-the
country bungalows of which Russians are so fond-and pine
trees, and there was an air of deep quiet and strength, like
the great river below. Beyond the pine trees was wheat land
rolling down the river to Stalingrad, where Russian soldiers
were holding a mass of rubble against Nazi tanks and
planes.
At the river's edge, below me, a boat had finished unloading
its cargo of birch logs . The logs were stacked in
a pile that must have covered several acres . With the Don
Basin lost, with war industries getting every lump of coal
available, this was the only fuel Russian cities would have
to burn in the cold winter to come . A shepherd led a flock
of sheep along the shore . In the middle of the river a tanker,
loaded full, was moving slowly upstream . A young Russian
soldier walked along the path behind the sheep, kicking
pebbles into the river with his foot . When he took off his
hat, the wind ruffled his hair to make him look even
younger, and it was only then that I noticed his hat had the
insignia of the NKVD, or secret police .
I thought of the pre- 19 17 shipbuilder who had built the
rest house behind me as a summer home . I had been told
that he had been a power in the land, a tight-fisted shipowner
and grain merchant who had prospered in the commerce
of the Volga when the town had been called Samara
and been liquidated when it was called Kuibishev, for the
Samaran revolutionist who devised the first Five-Year Plan .
The house had stayed, a little less shabby than its neighbors,
because the Red Army had found it useful .
I could see, it seemed to me, the entire generation of
men and women who had been destroyed, the families that
had been scattered, the loyalties that had been broken, the
thousands who had died from war and assassination and
starvation, in the name of the revolution .
The true story of that period will probably never be
told in detail. For except for those who escaped to other
lands, and they were relatively few, practically the whole
upper and middle classes of Russia have been completely
exterminated . And Russians today find the story a heroic
achievement .
I had not realized before coming to Russia to what extent
that is true . For I had not sufficiently taken into account,
in appraising modern Russia, that it is ruled by and composed
almost entirely of people whose parents had no property,
no education, and only a folk heritage . That there is
hardly a resident of Russia today whose lot is not as good as
or better than his parents' lot was prior to the revolution.
The Russian individual, like all individuals, naturally finds
some good in a system that has improved his own lot, and has
a tendency to forget the ruthless means by which it has been
brought about. This may be difficult for an American to
believe or like. But it was plainly the explanation among all
sorts of people, everywhere, and it was clearly expressed during
a stimulating evening I spent in Moscow when I was
trying to put a group of intelligent modem Russians on the
spot to defend their system.
But I had not gone to Russia to remember the past. Besides
my concrete assignments for the President, I had gone
determined to find an answer for myself to the actual problems
posed for our generation of Americans by the simple
fact that the Soviet Union, whether we like it or not, exists.
Some of these answers I believe I found, at least to my
own satisfaction. I can sum up the three most important in
a few sentences .
First, Russia is an effective society . It works. It has survival value . The record of Soviet resistance to Hitler has
been proof enough of this to most of us, but I must admit
in all frankness that I was not prepared to believe before
I went to Russia what I now know about its strength as a
going organization of men and women .
Second, Russia is our ally in this war . The Russians, more
sorely tested by Hitler's might even than the British, have
met the test magnificently . Their hatred of Fascism and the
Nazi system is real and deep and bitter. And this hatred
makes them determined to eliminate Hitler and exterminate
the Nazi blight from Europe and the world .
Third, we must work with Russia after the war . At least
it seems to me that there can be no continued peace unless
we learn to do so .
Those conclusions were reinforced by what I saw and
heard in various parts of the Soviet Union . I saw one portion
of the Russian front, close enough to know something
at first hand of what the Red Army has done . I saw a good
many of the factories behind the front, where the Soviet
workers have fooled too many of our experts by keeping up
a steady flow of supplies to the fighting men . And I saw collective
farms. Behind the factories and the farms, I saw and
talked with the Soviet newspapermen and writers who have
given all Russians the strangely exalted feeling of being in a
crusade. Behind the journalists, I saw the Kremlin, having
talked twice at great length with Mr . Stalin, and observed
something of how power is really exercised under the dictatorship
of the proletariat . Finally, behind all these, I saw
the Russian people from one end of Russia to the other,
and if my sampling of the 200,000,000 was absurdly small, it
had the advantage of being chosen entirely by chance .
One of the most enlightening experiences I had was a
trip to the fighting front at Rzhev . To get to Rzhev from
Moscow, you must drive up the Leningrad highway running
to Kalinin, which used to be called Tver, then westward
to Klin and on a little farther to a small country town
called Staritsa . We had started out in comfortable cars,
riding all night . At dawn, at Staritsa, we changed to American-
made jeeps . With me were General Philip Faymonville,
Major General Follet Bradley, Colonel Joseph A . Michela,
the American Military Attache in Russia, as well as four
members of my party and our Russian guides .
The jeep is a great invention, and as an American I am
proud of it. After fourteen hours in one, however, I had
acquired an intimacy with its structure, its angles and corners,
and its bucking gait that dulled some of my feeling
of pride in its American origin . For endless hours, over what
seemed endless miles, we bumped and bounced on roads so
rough and muddy and rutted and corduroyed that for the
first time I really understood the stories my father used to
tell me of conditions in pioneer Indiana .
At last we came to the headquarters, north of Rzhev, of
Lieutenant General Dmitri D . Lelyushenko, a man so colorful
and engaging that among all the personalities I have met
he stands out vividly . He was only thirty-eight years old, but
a lieutenant general in charge of sixteen divisions of fighting men at one of the most important fighting fronts in
the world .
He is a man of medium height, powerfully built, a born
horseman with bowed legs betraying his Cossack origin,
ruddy, vital, alert, full of animal spirits . He took us to his
underground headquarters. He explained his battle maps,
the placement of his troops, his plan of attack, the momentary
changes in the battle then raging ahead of and around
us.
He was then beginning the move to bypass Rzhev and
cut the railroad to Vyazma which was accomplished some
weeks after we had returned to the United States, preliminary
to the dramatic lifting of the siege of Leningrad . From
his headquarters in a grove of fir trees on a hill, we could
see and hear the artillery beyond the town about eight miles
from us.
I was struck by the eagerness of his staff . The general had
only to begin a sentence and two or three adjutants were
standing at attention, waiting for his order . I was also struck
by the number of girls and women in uniform . Besides communications,
sanitary and transport work, they stood guard
at the observation posts we saw in trees around the general's
headquarters and at the underground dugouts where the
officers did their work .
From headquarters we drove on, nearer to the battle,
and inspected a German strong point which had recently _
been captured by the Russians . What had once been a small
village, on the brow of a little hill, was a mass of wreckage,
mud, hamlets, and corpses which had not yet been buried.
In the bottom of a trench, I saw a can, unopened but half
buried in the mud, marked LUNCHEON HAM in English, and
I wondered on which other front in this global war the
Germans had picked it up.
The general told me his troops had just taken some German
prisoners and asked me if I would like to see them . I
said I would and that I would like to talk to them too. The
general replied, "I have been instructed to let you do whatever
you wish."
I took one look at his freshly captured prisoners, fourteen
of them standing forlornly in a line . I looked again,
more closely . Then I said to myself: Are these thinly dressed,
emaciated, consumptive-looking men the same terrifying
Huns, the unbeatable soldiers about whom I have read so
many tales?
Through interpreters I began to talk to them. I asked
them where they lived in Germany, their ages, whether they
got letters from home, how their families were getting along
without them, and a multitude of other simple, kindly
questions . With the answers, the last vestige of a German
military front disappeared. These soldiers became miserable,
homesick boys and men. Some were almost forty and
some were only seventeen.
I turned to the general and told him what I was thinking .
"That's right, Mr. Willkie," he answered, "but don't be
misled. The German equipment is still superb, and the
German officers are proficient and professional . German
army organization is unmatched . Even with such men as
you see here, the German Army is still the greatest fighting
military organization in the world. But if your nation will
send us the equipment we need, the Red Army will outfight
them on every front from the Caucasus to the North
Pole. For our men are better, and they are fighting for their
homeland."
I think his men were better, and it was clear all through
that day and the day following that they were fighting for
their homeland . A few miles behind the front, we saw Russian
peasants with their belongings piled high on farm
wagons, a cow hitched behind each wagon, plodding slowly
along the roads . The striking thing was that they were moving
not away from the front, but toward it, surging back
with a kind of elemental strength to the land which the
Red Army had won back from the enemy . The villages
they found were nothing but gaunt chimneys against the
sky, but it was time for fall plowing, so back they went .
A drizzling, cold rain-foretaste of what the Germans were
to face a month or two later-delayed our departure, and
the general invited us to supper with him . About forty of
us, Soviet officers and soldiers and their visitors, managed
to squeeze into one tent. We ate cold boiled bacon and rye
bread, tomatoes and cucumbers and pickles, and toasted
each other in vodka .
Unthinkingly, during supper, I asked the interpreter to
ask the general just how large a section of Russia's two thousand-
mile front he was defending . The general looked
at me as if offended, and the interpreter repeated after him,
slowly, "Sir, I am not defending . I am attacking."
After my visit to the Rzhev front, I realized more clearly
than ever before that in Russia the phrase "This is a
people's war" has real meaning . It is the Russian people in
the fullest sense who are resolved to destroy Hitlerism . What
they have been through and what they face in the months
ahead cannot fail to stir any American . Stalin had given me
certain facts about Russia's great sacrifices and desperate
needs before I went to the front and I had seen ample evidence
of both with my own eyes .
Already five million Russians had been killed, wounded,
or were missing. The great fertile farm lands of southwestern
Russia were largely in Nazi hands . Their products were
feeding the enemy and their men and women were forced
to be his slaves . Thousands of Russia's villages had been
destroyed and their people were homeless . Her transportation
system was overloaded ; her factories, producing to the
very limit, required the full output of her remaining oil
fields and coal mines.
Food in Russia was scarce-perhaps worse than scarce .
There would be little fuel in Russian homes in the approaching
winter . Even when I was in Moscow women and
children were gathering wood from fifty miles around to
make a little warmth against the coming cold . Clothing,
except for the army and essential war workers, was nearly
gone. Many vital medical supplies just did not exist .
This was the picture I got of wartime Russia. Yet no
Russian talked of quitting . They all knew what had happened
in the Nazi-occupied countries. The Russian people
-not just their leaders-the Russian people, I was convinced,
had chosen victory or death. They talked only of
victory.
I spent one entire day looking at a Soviet aviation plant .
I saw other factories in Russia, candy factories, munition.
factories, foundries, canneries, and power plants . But this
aviation plant, now located outside of Moscow, remains
most vivid in my memory.
It was a big place . My guess would be that some 30,000
workers were running three shifts and that they were making
a very presentable number of airplanes every day. The
plane produced was the now-famous Stormovik, a single-engined,
heavily armored fighting model which has been
developed by the Russians as one of the really novel weapons
of the war. It has a low ceiling, and climbs slowly, so
that it actually needs a fighter escort . But used as an antitank
weapon, traveling low and at high speed and carrying
heavy fire power, it has been one of the Red Army's most
powerful weapons.
American aviation experts were with me on this inspection,
and they confirmed my impression that the planes we
saw wheeled from the end of the assembly line and tested
on an airfield next to the factory were good planes . And,
peculiarly enough, they pronounced the armored protection
for the pilots the best of any they knew on any plane
anywhere in the world . I am no aviation expert, but I
have inspected a good many factories in my life. I kept my
eyes open, and I think my report is fair .
Parts of the manufacturing process were crudely organized.
The wings of the Stormovik are made of plywood,
compressed under steam pressure, and then covered with
canvas. The woodworking shops seemed to me to rely too
much on hand labor, and their product showed it. Also,
some of the electrical and plating shops were on the primitive
side.
With these exceptions, the plant would compare favorably
in output and efficiency with any I have ever seen . I
walked through shop after shop of lathes and punching
presses. I saw machine tools assembled from all over the
world, their trade-names showing they came from Chemnitz,
from Skoda, from Sheffield, from Cincinnati, from
Sverdlovsk, from Antwerp. They were being efficiently used.
More than thirty-five per cent of the labor in the plant
was done by women. Among the workers we saw boys not
more than ten years old, all dressed in blue blouses and
looking like apprentice students, even though the officials
of the factory pulled no punches in admitting that the
children work, in many of the shops, the full sixty-six-hour
week worked by the adults . Many of the boys were doing
skilled jobs on lathes, and seemed to be doing them extremely
well .
On the whole, the plant seemed to us Americans to be
overstaffed. There were more workers than would be found
in a comparable American factory . But hanging over every
third or fourth machine was a special sign, indicating that
its worker was a "Stakhanovite," pledged to overfulfill his
or her norm of production . The Stakhanovites, strange as
it may seem to us, are actually pieceworkers, paid at a progressively
increasing rate on a speed-up system which is like
an accelerated Bedeaux system . The Russian industrial system
is a strange paradox to an American. The method of
employing and paying labor would satisfy our most unsocial
industrialist . And the way capital is treated would, I
believe, completely satisfy a Norman Thomas . The walls
of the factory carried fresh and obviously honored lists of
those workers and those shops which were leading in what
was apparently a ceaseless competition for more and better
output. A fair conclusion would be that this extra incentive,
which was apparent in the conversation of any worker we
stopped to talk to at random, made up for a large part, but
not all, of the handicap of relative lack of skill .
The productivity of each individual worker was lower
than in the United States . Russian officials admitted this to
me freely . Until they can change this by education and
training, they explained, they must offset it by putting great
emphasis on patriotic drives for output and by recruiting all
the labor power, even that of children and old women, that
they can find. Meanwhile, and there was nothing done with
mirrors here, we could see the planes leaving the cavernous
doors of the final assembly unit, testing their machine guns
and cannon on a target range, and then taking to the air
over our heads.
The director of the plant, a grave-faced man in his late
thirties, named Tretyakov, took us to lunch in his office . We
walked through long corridors, lit only by dim blue electric
lights, to a simple room, entirely blacked out, where he
worked. On a conference table were sandwiches, hot tea,
cakes, the usual caviar, and the ubiquitous bottles of vodka .
In a corner stood two flags, both awarded to the plant by
the Kremlin for its successful fulfillment of its plan .
Tretyakov offered to answer my questions . He sat at the
head of the table. A small, thin silver star was the only insignia
on his dark business suit . I later learned that he was
one of only seven Soviet civilians who have been given this
star, emblem of the title of "Hero of the Soviet Union ."
After an hour of detailed cross-examination, it was clear
to me that he would have been an outstanding leader in
any society I have ever known . He spoke quietly, gravely,
with a full sense of the national and international urgency
of his work, with an obviously detailed knowledge of what
went on in every corner of his enormous plant . A few questions
I put to him, such as the number of planes produced
daily, the exact number of workers, the exact top speed of
the Stormovik, he turned aside politely but firmly . When I
tried to get the same information by more subtle approaches,
his eyes twinkled, but he was not fooled into betraying
any military secrets, any more than a responsible
factory manager in England or America would be .
This plant, he told us, had been picked up bodily from
its foundations in Moscow in October, 1941, when the
sound of Nazi cannonading could be heard in the Soviet
capital. It had been moved more than a thousand miles
over a transport system already loaded down with the requirements
of a nation in arms . It had been set up again,
many of its original workers tending their own machines
throughout the transfer, and by December, two months
later, it was producing planes at its new location .
During that first winter of 1941-42, he told me, there was
no heating in the plant. Workers built bonfires in the shops
to keep their machines from freezing. There was no housing
ready for the workers, and many of them slept next to
their tools. By the fall of 1942, things were better organized.
Factory restaurants, for example, which I had seen, apparently
served simple but adequate and nourishing food to
the workers. But I knew that in the same town the only
food that could be bought in the markets was black bread
and potatoes, and at exorbitant prices .
As the luncheon broke up, I began to question a short,
wiry young fellow whom the director had introduced to me
as the superintendent of production, his bright young man.
He was dressed in worker's clothes, with the mechanic's cap
which is almost the badge of an industrial worker in Russia.
He was a trained engineer, with an alert, almost jaunty manner,
energetic, intelligent, and with a thorough knowledge
of his job; the kind of young man that in American industrial
life would make rapid advancement, acquire a competence,
and become a leader among his fellows . In fact, he
reminded me so much of the promising American industrial
type that I decided to try to find out from him what were the
urges and the lures under the Communist system that caused
him to educate himself beyond his fellows, to work the extra
hours necessary to become superintendent over 30,000 men,
and to acquire the knowledge that was clearly leading him
toward the top.
He said he'd be glad to answer my questions . He told me
that he was thirty-two years old, married, and the father of
two children. He lived in a comfortable house much better
than the average, and in peacetime had an automobile.
"How does your pay as superintendent of this factory
compare with the pay of the average skilled worker in the
plant?" I asked him .
He thought for a moment: "It's about ten times as much ."
That would be on the same ratio twenty-five or thirty
thousand dollars a year in America, and actually was about
what a man of similar responsibility in America would receive.
So I said to him, "I thought Communism meant
equality of reward ."
Equality, he told me, was not part of the present Soviet
conception of socialism . "From each according to his capacities, to each according to his-work," was the slogan of
Stalinist socialism, he explained, and only when they had
achieved the Communist phase of their development would
the slogan be changed to "From each according- to his
capacities, to each according to his needs." Even then, he
added, complete equality would not be necessary or desirable
.
"With such an income normally you are able to save, to
put aside something, aren't you?" I went on .
He laughed and said, "Yes, if my wife doesn't spend too
much."
"What do you do with your savings? How do you invest
them?"
"With my first savings, we bought ourselves a nice house,"
he told me .
"And then?"
"Then we bought a place in the country, where the family
could go for vacation and I could go for a rest, or to fish
and hunt when I could get away from the factory ."
"And now that you have these things all paid for, what
do you do with your extra money?"
"Oh, I keep it in cash, or put it in government bonds ."
Soviet government bonds are non-interest-bearing, and
remembering the first money I accumulated and the
thought I gave to getting as much income from it as possible,
I asked him, just to see what his answer would be,
"Why don't you invest it in something that will give you a
good return?"
He looked at me in surprise and, I thought, even with
a slight air of superiority . "You mean, Mr. Willkie, to get
return on capital? That isn't possible in Russia, and anyhow
I don't believe in it ."
I tried to get him to tell me why, and for ten minutes I
found myself listening to Marxist and Leninist theories
which I finally interrupted with the question :
"Well, what does cause you to work so hard?"
He answered, sweeping his arm about him as he spoke,
"I run this factory . Someday I'll be the director . Do you see
these badges?" pointing to a string of decorations pinned
on his blouse. "Those were given to me by the party and
the government because I was good ." He spoke with frank
cockiness . "Someday, if I'm good enough, the party will
give me something to do with running the government ."
"But who will take care of you when you are an old man?"
"I'll have some cash put aside, and if I don't have enough,
the government will provide for me ."
"Don't you ever have a desire to own a plant of your
own?" I asked.
To which he replied with another deluge of Marxian
economic and social philosophy with which he was as familiar
as with the working of his plant .
"Well, how about your family?" I persisted. "Don't you
want your children to have a better start than you had?
Don't you want to protect your wife in case you go before
she does?"
He said impatiently, "That's mere capitalistic talk, Mr .
Willkie . I started as a worker . My children will have as good
a start as I had. My wife works now, and as long as she's
well she'll continue to work . When she's unable to do so,
the state will take care of her ."
"Well," I said, "what happens to you if you don't make
good in this job?"
And he said with a grim smile, "I'll be liquidated." I
knew that might mean anything from demotion to death
itself. But he obviously thought that there was little danger
that he would not make good.
I then tried to tackle him from another angle.
"Suppose-in ordinary times, not wartime-suppose you
don't like your director here . Can you leave and get a job
in some other factory?"
"Most workers could, but as a party member, I must stay
where the party thinks I can do the most good ."
"But suppose you should prefer to work at a different
kind of job. Can you change your job?"
"That's for those in authority to say ."
"I understand that you are in complete accord with the
economic and political theories of the state . But if you happened
to hold different ideas, could you express them and
fight for them?"
It took me ten minutes of hot colloquy to get him even
to consider such a supposition, and then his answer was
only a shrug of the shoulders. It was my turn to be impatient
and I said, somewhat sharply, "Then actually you've
got no freedom."
He drew himself up almost belligerently and said, "Mr.
Willkie, you don't understand . I've had more freedom than
my father and grandfather ever had . They were peasants.
They were never allowed to learn to read or write . They
were slaves to the soil . When they sickened, there were no
doctors or hospitals for them . I am the first man in the long
chain of my ancestors who has had the opportunity to educate
himself, to advance himself-to amount to anything.
And that for me is freedom. It may not seem freedom to you,
but "remember, we are in the developing stage of our system .
Someday we'll have political freedom, too ."
I pressed him : "How can you ever have political freedom
and economic freedom where the state owns everything?"
He poured out his theories in a seemingly endless rush .
But he had no answers beyond the Marxian ones in which
he was so well grounded, and to that basic question, Marxism
gives no answer.
As I turned to go, I overheard Major Kight, our amazingly
skillful and intelligent pilot, say to Joe Barnes, "Listen,
don't let's get away before you explain to that fellow
that Mr. Willkie was just trying to get him to talk . Sure,
we in America like what money will buy and want to get
ahead a bit, but it's not only money that makes us work .
This insignia on my shoulder brought me a big raise in pay
when I got it . But at the same time I got this piece of ribbon
here," pointing to the ribbon of the Distinguished Flying
Cross, "and that didn't bring me a cent . You tell him that
I'd give the rank and the pay raise back for nothing, but I
wouldn't give away the ribbon for a million dollars ."
Russia's farms, just as much as its factories, have been
mobilized for total war, and their capacity to support a
fighting nation has been one of Hitler's most profound miscalculations
and one of the world's surprises .
Day after day we flew over these farms, all the way from
the front itself, at Rzhev, to the farthest limits of cultivation
in Central Asia and Siberia . For Russia's farming lands
stretch nearly six thousand miles behind the front . Only
from the air, I suspect, can one get any sense of the immensity
of this farming land, or of its infinite variety . Parts
of it, with grain crops running to the horizon, made our
pilot, Major Kight, homesick for his native state of Texas .
Other parts, like the irrigated valley near Tashkent, look
like southern California.
On the Volga near Kuibishev, I had a chance to see some
of these farms at closer range . We went up the river in a
neat, modern river boat. Through the trees along the banks
could be seen the rooftops of stately homes, once the country
estates of the wealthy from as far away as Moscow and
St. Petersburg, now rest homes and sanitariums for worker.
They reminded me of the great houses one sees from a
Hudson River boat . But the Volga is more tricky than the
Hudson-as I found for myself when our pilot once let me
try his wheel . Suddenly we were among cross currents that
rapidly sent us shoreward, much to the delight of the laughing
Volga boatmen . Down the river floated great rafts of
logs bound for lumber mills, with little huts built on them
and cattle and chickens for the families who float slowly on
these rafts all summer from the forests of north Russia to
the cities of the south.
I had been told in Kuibishev of plans to dam a great
bend in the Volga River for the production of electric
power; and on this trip we went over the part of the Volga
concerned in the proposed development. I am not one to be
easily surprised by vast governmental power developments,
but when it became clear that this one development, if
completed, would produce twice as much power as all the
TVA, the Grand Coulee, and the Bonneville developments
combined, I began to realize that the Russians dream and
plan on a scale to fit their vast forests and plains .
We left the Volga bend to drive inland to a collective
farm which had formerly been a hunting estate of a member
of the lesser nobility . It had some 8ooo acres, with fifty-five
families living on it, a ratio of about 14o acres per family,
which is about the size of the average farm in Rush
County, Indiana.
The soil was good-a dark, rich loam-but the rainfall
was slight, only some thirteen inches per year . In Indiana
we have about forty. Crops were cultivated without benefit
of fertilizer, and cultivation was almost exclusively mechanical.
Largely wheat and rye and other small grains were
grown. The season's average yield per acre of wheat was
fifteen and one-half bushels ; of rye a little less, which I
thought pretty good under the circumstances. To get this
acreage yield, incidentally, required some concentrated figuring on the part of Mike Cowles and myself, involving the
transposition of hectares to acres, and poods to bushels . We
gave up trying to arrive at a comparable price per' bushel
in American money . For all quotations were given us in
rubles, and we found that the value of the ruble is subject
to rapid fluctuation and varies in different markets . We
could, however, judge the quality of the grain, and it seemed
to us good.
Each of the fifty-five families on the farm was allowed to
own one cow ; the scraggly herd, consisting of every known
mixture as to breed, grazed together on a common near a
cluster of small houses in which the families lived . But the
collectivist farm itself owned 8oo head of cattle, 250 of
them cows, of excellent stock and all well cared for. The
cattle barns were of brick and large ; the floors were concrete
and the stanchions modern . The calves were almost
tenderly watched over, in clean neat stalls, and women who
were in charge of the barns explained to me their methods
of improving the stock by care and breeding . The methods
were scientific and modern .
I saw only one able-bodied man on the farm ; he was the
manager. Most of the workers were women or children, with
a few old men . For the farms of Russia have been the enormous
reservoir from which the Red Army has been recruited,
and the wives and children of Red Army soldiers
are today feeding the country .
The manager was the czar of the farm . He was a man
of scientific agricultural training, alert and assured . He
planned the crops and directed the work . Every man,
woman, and child on the place was under his authority .
He, in turn, was responsible for the success of the project
and for the production of the farm's quota in the war economy.
He would rise in power and in status if he succeeded ;
his punishment would be severe if he failed .
I was curious about the economy of one of these farms
and asked many questions. A careful record of how much
each member works is kept, I was told, in the farm office.
The unit is a "workday," but special skills are recognized,
so that a tractor-driver, for example, who plows a certain
number of acres in a day is credited with two "workdays ."
The binding of a certain number of sheaves, or the tending
of a certain number of cows, similarly constitutes an
extra "workday ."
This farm, like most of the collective farms of Russia,
rented its tractors and mechanical equipment from government-
owned machine stations, and payment was made from
the farm's harvest, not in rubles but in kind . Then the farm
had to pay taxes, which constitute almost a rental payment
to the government, also in kind. The balance of each harvest
was distributed to the members of the farm on the
basis of how many "workdays" each had accumulated on
the records.
What each member received in this final distribution of
the harvest could be traded for manufactured goods at a
small store on the farm property, or it could be sold . The
government, however, has put steadily increasing pressure
on the collective farmers to sell their crops directly to the
government, though in theory they remain free to sell anywhere
they wish after they have paid in kind for the machines
they have used and their taxes . It seemed to me that
most of the farmers I talked to had plenty of cash, with no
way to spend it . For goods in the stores were scarce and
steadily decreasing as a result of the almost complete absorption
of all factories by the war and the needs of the
Red Army.
We went to the home of the farm manager for lunch . He
was a man of thirty-seven, married, with two children. He
lived in a small stone house, simple, and in atmosphere not
very different from a prosperous farmhouse in the United
States. It was a hearty hospitality, with much laughing good
humor. The food was abundant, simple but good, and the
wife of the manager, who had cooked the meal, urged me
to eat as I have been urged many times in Indiana farmhouses
: "Mr. Willkie, do have some more . You've hardly
eaten a thing." And then, of course, there was the ever-present
vodka . Water was nowhere in sight .
I pressed the manager and his wife, and talked with some
of the workers on the farm, trying to find out how it was
that they were free of the consuming urge of every farmer
I ever knew to own his own bit of land . To some of them it
even seemed strange that I inquired . But the manager explained
that he and the rest were less than a hundred years
from serfdom ; neither they nor their ancestors had ever
owned the land they worked on ; and they found the present
system good.
I learned later that this farm was somewhat above the
average in physical equipment. But it was run much like
250,000 other collective farms in the Soviet Union . And I
began to realize how the collective farms constituted the
very backbone of Russia's tough resistance.
Behind the front in Russia stand the factories and the
farms, in a form of total mobilization unknown perhaps
anywhere else in the world except in Germany. Behind the
factories and the farms stands the machine which keeps this
mobilization total .
One of the most interesting and important parts of this
machine seemed to me to be the newspapers, like every other
part, under government control .
In Moscow, for the first time in my life or in that of
Gardner Cowles, Jr., American newspaper publisher, who
was with me, we saw men and women standing in queues a
block long to buy newspapers . The daily press is published
in circulations which run into seven figures but still cannot
meet the demand.
In smaller towns throughout Russia, I saw small crowds
of people gathered around glass cases set up in the streets.
Inside the cases were pinned copies of Pravda or Izvestia,
the country's two leading papers . People wanted to read
them enough to stand in the cold and read over other
people's shoulders .
When we flew to Tashkent, our airplane made the flight
faster than any regular commercial service of the Soviets.
As the first Americans who had been seen in that Central
Asian city in many years, we were naturally enough objects
of considerable curiosity. We were, that is, until it
was learned that we had brought more recent copies of the
Moscow papers than any Tashkent had seen . At this point,
even our official hosts deserted us to read the news .
I was curious about this, and everywhere I went I asked
questions about it. The press in Russia, I came to believe,
is the strongest single agency in the hands of the government
for short-term purposes, just as I believe_the schools
are their strongest agency over the long pull. The present
government of Russia has had both the schools and the
press in its control now for twenty-five years, and foreigners
who still belittle the strength of this government, in cold,
matter-of-fact terms of the support and sacrifices it can demand
from the Russian people, are talking through their
hats.
One night, in Moscow, I had a chance to check the kind
of thinking and emotion that goes into the Soviet press . The
American newspapermen in Moscow are as able a group of
reporters as I have ever known . Walter Kerr of the New
York Herald Tribune, Leland Stowe of The Chicago Daily
News, Maurice Hindus of the New York Herald Tribune,
Ralph Parker of The New York Times, Henry Shapiro of the
United Press, Eddie Gilmore and Henry Cassidy of the Associated Press, Robert Magidoff of the National Broadcasting
Company, and Larry Lesueur of the Columbia Broadcasting
System, Wally Graebner of Time and Life-I know
no other city in the world, except possibly London, where
there is such a company of lively, honest, and hard-working
foreign correspondents and newspapermen . Some of them
assembled one night a group of Soviet newspapermen,
turned us loose in a big room with food and drink and interpreters
but no officials, and let me ask the questions I wanted,
with no holds barred .
They were an interesting group . There was Ilya Ehrenbourg,
Soviet reporter and novelist who has lived most of
his life in France and knows western Europe as well, I imagine,
as any foreign newspaperman . There was Boris Voitekhov,
a young reporter and playwright, who had written the
story of the defense of Sevastopol up to the last moment
before its fall, when he escaped in a submarine. There was
Valentina Genne, a young Soviet newspaperwoman . Simonov
was there, a dour-faced young man in Russian rubashka
and leather boots. He had come to Moscow that day from
Stalingrad . He is the author of the play Russian People, and
perhaps the most popular newspaperman in Russia today .
There was General Alexei Ignatiev, a fine figure of a man in
his sixties, who served as military attache abroad before the
1917 Revolution and is now one of the leading commentators
of Red Star, the daily newspaper of the Red Army .
We ate smoked sturgeon and drank hot tea and talked
most of the night. There was two-way traffic in the conversa-
tion. They pounded me on the second front in Europe, on
what had happened to Rudolph Hess, on the Russian need
for more American supplies and equipment . They were
well informed, eager, curious, critical but not antagonistic .
I was told later that this had been probably the first frank
and off-the-record conversation between Soviet newspapermen
and a visiting foreigner for a decade.
None of the professional writers present that evening have
violated the confidence in which we exchanged opinions .
And I shall certainly not do so . But they will not misunderstand,
I am certain, if I report for once in my life on some
of the things newspapermen told me .
Two things deserve to be reported . The first was what I
can only call a quality of intransigence . Those fellows were
uncompromising. Train a man from boyhood in a system
of absolutism, and he will think in blacks and whites.
For example, I asked Simonov, just returned from Stalingrad,
whether or not the German prisoners taken on that
front made the same poor and shabby impression I had got
from Germans I had interviewed a few days before on the
Rzhev front. My question was translated into Russian . But
there was no answer. Someone else picked up the ball and
carried it.
After living for a few weeks with interpreters, you learn
to be surprised at nothing. So I repeated the question .
Again, there was no answer. This time I waited until the
conversation had come full cycle on itself and reached a
pause. I asked the question a third time . General Ignatiev,
a courtly and cosmopolitan gentleman and the only Russian
present, by the way, who spoke a little English, finally
answered me:
"Mr. Willkie, it is only natural that you should not understand.
When this war began, we all sought out German
prisoners. We cross-examined them. We wanted to find out
why they had come to invade our land . We found out many
interesting things about the Germans, and about what the
Nazis have done to them.
"But now it is different . Since the offensive last winter,
when we pushed the Germans back and recaptured many
towns and villages they had taken, we feel differently. We
have seen with our own eyes what the Germans did to our
people and our homes. Today, no decent Soviet newspaperman
would talk to a German, even in a prison camp ."
Or take another example . I had been suggesting for a
few days, as adroitly as I could, that it would be a good
move for the Soviets to send Dmitri Shostakovich, their
great composer, to the United States on a visit . The night
before, I had sat in the packed Tchaikovsky Hall, Moscow's
great concert building, and listened to his Seventh Symphony.
It is tough music, and much of it is hard for me to
like, but its opening movement is one of the most impressive
things I have ever heard.
"We have got to understand each other," I said. "We
have got to learn to know each other. We are allies in this
war, and the American people will not let you down until
Hitler has been defeated. But I would like to see us work
together in the peace as well as after it . This will require
great patience and great tolerance and great understanding
on both sides . Why can't Shostakovich be sent to the United
States, where he already has a host of admirers and where
he could help immeasurably in this job of understanding
that we both face?"
It was Simonov who answered me this time .
"Mr. Willkie, understanding works both ways . We have
always tried to learn about America . We have borrowed a
lot from you, and sent our best men to study in America .
We know something about your country, not as much as
we would like to but enough to understand why you extend
this invitation to Shostakovich .
"You should send some of your good men to study us .
Then you would understand why, perhaps, we do not respond
warmly to the invitation . You see, we are engaged
in a life-and-death struggle . Not only our own lives, but the
idea which has shaped our lives for a generation hangs in
the balance at Stalingrad tonight. To suggest to us that we
should send a musician to the United States, which is also
involved in this war and where human lives also hang in
the balance, to persuade you with music of something that
is as plain as the nose on your face, is in a funny way insulting
to us . Please don't misunderstand me ."
I don't think I misunderstood him.
The second quality of the evening which deserves reporting
was one of calm, quiet, confident pride and patriotism .
It is hard for us Americans, who have read more horror
stories about Russia than anything else for many years, to
realize that a generation is running the Soviet Union today
which knows its own strength . I was to be immensely im-
pressed with this later, in central Asia and in Siberia . It is
a quality which I have often known in America, especially
in the West .

In Moscow I had two long talks with Joseph Stalin . Much
of what was said I am not at liberty to report . But about the
man himself there is no reason to be cautious . He is one of
the significant men of this generation .
At his invitation I called on him one evening at 7 :30. He
apparently has most of his conferences at night. His office
was a fair-sized room about eighteen by thirty-five feet . On
its walls hung pictures of Marx and Engels and Lenin, and
profiles of Lenin and Stalin together, the same pictures that
you see in practically every schoolhouse, public building,
factory, hotel, hospital, and home in Russia. Often you find
in addition the picture of Molotov . In an anteroom visible
from the office was a huge globe some ten feet in diameter .
Stalin and Molotov were standing to welcome me at the
far end of a long oak conference table. They greeted me
simply and we talked for some three hours-about the war,
about what would come after, about Stalingrad and the
front, about America's position, the relationship of Great
Britain, the United States, and Russia, and about many
other important and unimportant subjects .
A few days later I spent some five hours sitting next to
Stalin, through the numerous courses of a state dinner which
he gave for me ; later while we all drank coffee at little tables
in another room, and finally through a private showing of a
motion picture of the siege and defense of Moscow .
It was at this dinner, incidentally, that we toasted the
interpreters . We had toasted our respective countries and
leaders ; we had toasted the Russian people and the American
people and our hopes for future collaboration ; we had
toasted each other. Finally it occurred to me that the only
people really working at that dinner were the interpreters
who were kept bobbing up and down to translate . So I proposed
a toast to them . Later, I said to Mr . Stalin, "I hope
I didn't step out of line in suggesting that we toast the
interpreters ." And he replied, "Not at all, Mr. Willkie, we
are a democratic country ."
Stalin, I should judge, is about five feet four or five, and
gives the appearance of slight stockiness . I was surprised to
find how short he is ; but his head, his mustache, and his
eyes are big. His face, in repose, is a hard face, and he
looked tired in September-not sick, as is so often reported,
but desperately tired . He had a right to be . He talks quietly,
readily, and at times with a simple, moving eloquence .
When he described to me Russia's desperate situation as to
fuel, transportation, military equipment, and man power,
he was genuinely dramatic.
He has, I would say, a hard, tenacious, driving mind . He
asked searching questions, each of them loaded like a revolver,
each of them designed to cut through to what he
believed to be the heart of the matter that interested him .
He pushes aside pleasantries and compliments and is impatient
of generalities .
When he asked me about my trips through various factories,
he wanted detailed reports, department by department, not general judgments as to their operating methods
and efficiency . When I asked him about Stalingrad, he developed
for me logically not alone its geographical and
military importance, but the moral effect on Russia, Germany,
and particularly the Middle East, of the successful
or unsuccessful defense . He made no predictions as to Russia's
ability to hold it and he was quite definite in his assertion
that neither love of homeland nor pure bravery could
save it. Battles were won or lost primarily by numbers, skill,
and materiel.
He told me again and again that his propaganda was deliberately
designed to make his people hate the Nazis, but
it was obvious that he himself had a certain bitter admiration
for the efficiency by which Hitler had transplanted to
Germany as much as ninety-four per cent of the working
population from some of the conquered Russian territory,
and he respected the completely professional training of the
German Army, particularly its officers . He discounted, just
as Winston Churchill did to me two years before in England,
the notion that Hitler was but a tool in the hands of
abler men . He did not think we should count upon an
early internal collapse in Germany. He said that the way
to defeat Germany was to destroy its army . And he believed
that one of the most effective methods of destroying faith
in Hitler's invincibility throughout Europe was in continuous
air-raid bombings of German cities and of German-held
docks and factories in the conquered countries .
When we talked of the causes of the war and the economic
and political conditions that would face the world
after it was over, his comprehension was broad, his detailed
information exact, and the cold reality of his thinking apparent.
Stalin is a hard man, perhaps even a cruel man, but
a very able one . He has few illusions .
His admiration for the effectiveness of American production
methods would more than satisfy the National Association
of Manufacturers. But he does not understand the
indirections and some of the restraints of the democratic
methods of waging war . He wondered, for instance, why
the democracies should not insist upon using certain bases
for war purposes that would be of great value to them, particularly
if the nations that owned them were uncooperative
and not able to defend them .
Quite contrary to general report, Stalin has great respect
for Winston Churchill ; he almost said it to me-the respect
of one great realist for another .
On the personal side Stalin is a simple man, with no
affectations or poses. He does not seek to impress by any
artificial mannerisms . His sense of humor is a robust one,
and he laughs readily at unsubtle jokes and repartee . Once
I was telling him of the Soviet schools and libraries I had
seen-how good they seemed to me . And I added, "But if
you continue to educate the Russian people, Mr. Stalin, the
first thing you know you'll educate yourself out of a job ."
He threw his head back and laughed and laughed . Nothing
I said to him, or heard anyone else say to him, through
two long evenings, seemed to amuse him as much .
Strange as it may seem, Stalin dresses in light pastel
shades. His well-known tunic is of finely woven material
and is apt to be a soft green or a delicate pink; his trousers
a light-tannish yellow or blue . His boots are black and
highly polished. Ordinary social pleasantries bother him a
little. As I was leaving him after my first talk, I expressed
appreciation of the time he had given me, the honor he
conferred in talking so candidly. A little embarrassed, he
said:
"Mr. Willkie, you know I grew up a Georgian peasant.
I am unschooled in pretty talk. All I can say is I like you
very much ."
Inevitably, Stalin's simple ways have set a fashion of a
kind for other Soviet leaders . Especially in Moscow and in
Kuibishev, there is an absence of flamboyance about Russian
leaders that is remarkable . They all dress simply . They
talk little and listen well . A surprising number of them are
young, in their thirties. It would be my guess, which I could
not prove or document, that Stalin likes a pretty heavy
turnover of young people in his immediate entourage in
the Kremlin . It is his way, I think, of keeping his ear to the
ground.
Among the other leaders I met and talked to at any great
length were Viacheslav Molotov, the Foreign Minister, Andrei
Vishinsky and Solomon Lozovsky, his assistants, Marshal
Voroshilov, the former Commissar of Defense, Anastasia
Mikoyan, Commissar of Supply and head of the Soviet
foreign-trade apparatus . Each of these is an educated man,
interested in the foreign world, completely unlike in manner,
appearance, and speech the uncouth, wild Bolshevik
of our cartoons .
In Kuibishev, at a dinner given for me by Mr. Vishinsky,
who was the chief state prosecutor in all the grim treason
trials of four and five years ago, I caught myself studying
his white hair, his professor's face, and his quiet, almost
studious manner, and wondering if this could possibly be
the same man who had purged some of the oldest heroes
of the Russian Revolution on charges of murder and betrayal
of their country .
Whenever the talk of these men ran to the peace, to what
the world must be prepared to do after the war is over, they
talked with statesmanship and real understanding .
Since I have returned to the United States, Mr . Stalin has
defined the program, as he sees it, of the Anglo-American-
Soviet coalition in the European war . These are the goals
he calls for :
"Abolition of racial exclusiveness, equality of nations and
integrity of their territories, liberation of enslaved nations
and restoration of their sovereign rights, the right of every
nation to arrange its affairs as it wishes, economic aid to
nations that have suffered and assistance to them in attaining
their material welfare, restoration of democratic liberties,
the destruction of the Hitlerite regime ."
We may ask : does Stalin mean what he says? Some will
point out that only two years ago Russia was in an alliance
of expediency with Germany . I make no defense of expediency,
military, political, temporary, or otherwise . For I
believe the moral losses of expediency always far outweigh
the temporary gains. And I believe that every drop of blood
saved through expediency will be paid for by twenty drawn
by the sword. But a Russian, feeling that by the German
alliance his country was buying time, might well remind
the democracies of Munich, and of the seven million tons
of the best grade of scrap iron the United States shipped to
Japan between 1937 and 1940.
Perhaps we can better measure the good faith of Stalin's
statement in the light of the millions of Russians who have
already died defending their fatherland and of the sixty
million who have become slaves of the Nazis; in those other
millions of Russian men and women who are working feverishly
sixty-six hours a week in factories and mines to forge
and produce instruments of war for the fighters at the
front; and in the effort that went into the almost miraculous
movement of great factories, hundreds of miles, that
they might operate, uninterrupted, beyond Nazi reach . For
it is in the attitude of the people that we may find the best
interpretation of Stalin's purpose .
Many among the democracies fear and mistrust Soviet
Russia. They dread the inroads of an economic order that
would be destructive of their own. Such fear is weakness.
Russia is neither going to eat us nor seduce us . That is-and
this is something for us to think about-that is, unless our
democratic institutions and our free economy become so
frail through abuse and failure in practice as to make us
soft and vulnerable . The best answer to Communism is a
living, vibrant, fearless democracy-economic, social, and
political. All we need to do is to stand up and perform
according to our professed ideals . Then those ideals will
be safe.
No, we do not need to fear Russia . We need to learn to
work with her against our common enemy, Hitler. We
need to learn to work with her in the world after the war.
For Russia is a dynamic country, a vital new society, a force
that cannot be bypassed in any future world.

