Stalin Enters the Balkans 


I Peace ? But Not Communism 

IN THE early summer some of us flew down to Bessarabia, by 
then re-incorporated into the Soviet Union, and went by car 
across the Prut River into Rumania, where for the first time the 
Red Army broke onto the native soil of an Axis enemy. Here in 
the historic corridor leading down to the mouth of the Danube 
and to the soft sparkle of the Black Sea the crude outline of a new 
pattern of life was beginning to form, a pattern that would eventually spill across the frontiers of all the Danubian countries. 
Soon the Red Army would cross into Transylvania and join 
hands with the fighting partisans of Marshal Tito. Soon it would 
enter the mountain passes that gird Bulgaria, to cut off the road 
to Greece and reach into Belgrade, to block the Nazis’ retreat 
from Siberia. Soon it would storm the gates of Budapest, and 
finally descend upon Hitler’s native Austria. 

What use would the Soviet Government make of its victory 
in the first of these Balkan lands to fall to the Red banner? the 
homeland of King Carol, who had led his people into catastrophe 
and the ruling class itself toward suicide? Was Russia interested 
in rewards beyond seeing its Rumanian enemies crushed and 
made to pay heavy reparations? How would Stalin exact retribution for crimes which included the murder of some 200,000 
Soviet citizens in Odessa alone? according to official Soviet 
claims? Would the Kremlin control the political, social and cultural life of Rumania? If not, what kind of state would emerge 
to succeed the doomed dictatorship of General Ion Antonescu, 
to whom Carol had surrendered the fate of the nation? 

We knew that Russia had subscribed to the terms of the Atlantic Charter and to the phrases of the Moscow and Teheran declarations, which promise the future security of all nations, including sovereign life even to Axis satellites. We knew that 
Premier Molotov had made a specific announcement, when the 
Red Army entered Rumania, guaranteeing to respect its territorial frontiers and not to interfere with Rumanian institutions. 
How well was the Red Army observing these self-imposed obligations? How would it behave in the future? 

The truth is that those questions, which mean so much not 
simply to the Balkans but to all members of that “world family 
of democratic nations” discussed at the Teheran conference, 
cannot be answered fully for perhaps a decade. But I can tell 
you something about what it was like when the Red Army conquered Rumania and from this you may be able to piece together 
the pattern of a destiny soon to unfold throughout the Balkans. 

In Dorohoi and Botosani, two prefectures in Rumanian Moldavia which had been held by the Russians since April, 1944, 1 
talked to mayors and to village officials, to trade unionists and 
to farms, to Jewish refugees from Antonescu’s concentration 
camps and to a Rumanian chief of police, to representatives of 
several large American business organizations and to a mother 
superior in a Rumanian convent. 

All these people, some with satisfaction and others with regret, agreed on one thing: they said the Russians had not instigated any revolutionary movements. They said the Red Army 
had observed the Molotov declaration with disciplined correctness? and we saw the declaration posted wherever the hammer 
and sickle flew. 

There appeared to be no open effort by the Red Army to propagandize the masses in favor of communism or socialism. Pictures of the King and Queen and of the late Dowager Queen 
Marie still hung on the walls of official buildings, while Stalin’s 
portrait was strangely absent, except in offices of the Red Army. 
On the surface of things, nothing suggested that the inhabitants 
did not enjoy a degree of liberty which, considering that Rumania was still a country at war against Russia, was astonishing. 
In fact, many of the Rumanians apparently wanted to fight on 
the winning side now. The handsome young Russian commandant of Dorohoi told me that peasants were coming to him every 
day, asking to enlist in the Red Army. 

“The loyalty of the population is remarkable,” said he. “Men 
wish to become soldiers and women wish to join up as nurses. 
We have to refuse as politely as we can.” 

Elsewhere, I was told by Vian Bogsan, a former chief of police who had resigned his commission in the Rumanian Army 
before the Reds arrived, that he could easily recruit a pro-Allied 
army. He said he would gladly offer his services if the Allies 
would furnish arms. But while the Russians used the local population for labor when necessary, they evidently considered the 
peasants unsuitable for a volunteer army. 

Meanwhile, no drastic changes had as yet been effected in 
Rumanian laws, customs or institutions. The Antonescu ban on 
political parties had not been officially lifted; property laws remained unchanged; private trade continued as before. The same 
forms of government, and even some of the same personnel, 
still prevailed. 

All in all, the Prisoner of Zenda still seemed a credible story 
in the atmosphere preserved here. The peasants had not yet put 
on shoes, nor forgotten to take off their caps before gentlemen 
and judging from demonstrations a gentleman meant everybody 
who wore shoes and wasn’t a Jew. And if you asked the Rumanians whom they wanted to govern them after the war, and 
whether they wanted the monarchy or a republic, likely as not 
they would answer, “Why, King Carol, of course! This fellow 
Antonescu has stirred up too much trouble for us, and King 
Michael is too young to handle him.” 

Communism? The peasants said they didn’t know what it was. 
The king and dynasty? they were something everybody understood. But they all knew one thing: they wanted peace. “If we 
could have peace”? an old peasant woman broke in when her 
husband was explaining to me why he was a “liberal,” and for 
King Carol? “if we could have peace, we would even put up 
with a republic.” 


II 

Improbable Appearances 

And yet the external wounds of war hereabouts seemed re- 
markably few compared with any combat area I had seen in 
Russia, and it was hard to believe the Red Army would, indefi- 
nitely, refuse to help itself to booty to recoup Soviet losses. The 
whole region of Botosani was taken without fighting, in the Rus- 
sian grand encirclement. I heard details about this from Evelyn 
May Tormry, a white-haired Irish lady from Dublin who had 
lived in Botosani for thirty years, but still had a brogue that 
would span the Danube. 

"We just w r oke up one morning and there, without a sound, 
were the Russians,” she told me. “They had come in during the 
night and not one person was killed.” 

But nothing seemed quite real in this country? including Mrs. 
Tormry. It was tragic, pathetic, comic, and you had to keep rubbing your eyes to believe in its opera-bouffe effect. The warm 
welcome these people gave you, their nominal foe; the brazen 
or stupid contempt with which Rumanian officials spoke of their 
peasantry before listening Red Army officers who were themselves the sons of peasants; the rough but richly embroidered 
garb of the country folk, who stood gaping at you across picket 
fences over which spilled roses and grapes; the romantic beauty 
of the purple hills carpeted with tawny wheat fields bordered 
with wild flowers; the quaint cobbled streets of the towns and 
the broken-down carriages drawn between lines of undersized 
houses; the nuns chanting prayers in rooms heavy with incense, 
while Red Army officers stood with lowered heads and tongues 
in cheeks: it all added up to a fantasy conceived in Hollywood 
and lacking only usherettes and bingo to complete the illusion. 

This state of improbability was further heightened by incidents like these. You were entertained by local talent in Botosani, where a Jewish member of the “Jaszboy Band” sang for you 
?in an English version translated from the Rumanian? “My 
Heart Belongs to Daddy.” Only, instead of daddy, he sang of a 
heart that belonged “to my very nice girl.” You went to a banquet and even the local rum and brandy seemed bogus. You 
were honored by another local orchestra playing favorite airs 
of the Red Army, but when it stood up to render “the American 
national anthem,” it turned out to be Yankee Doodle. 

Things did not seem to clarify much more when you investigated more closely. Why was the Irish lady, Evelyn Tormry, who 
had never acknowledged the Free State of Eire and who still 
held an English passport, never interned by the Rumanians? 
Why? Because the Rumanians had really loved the British all 
along. So they told us. At a tea given in our honor the beavered 
niayor of Dorohoi devoted ninety percent of his speech to fondly 
recalling the historic ties of friendship between his country in 
general, and himself in particular, for dear old Britannia. 

Rumanian freedom,” he declaimed, “was born in England. 
For 400 years English blood has been shed for Rumanian freedom! You have given us Queen Marie! Every Rumanian reveres 
Queen Marie as a second mother. She had English blood, but the 
soul of a Rumanian!” Choking voice, tear-dimmed eyes; it was 
Wonderful. 

Surely Rumania’s ancient friends, the English, could understand Mayor Lovenescu’s feelings? Surely the Americans, ‘who 
are fighting for the freedom of small nations” (against the Bolsheviks, like us, he seemed to hint), would also understand that 
the dynasty really meant no harm to its old allies? Surely a way 
would be found to save Rumania from the consequences of the 
mistakes of her rulers, the slight error of shooting a few hundred 
thousand Russians? Red Army officers listened to all this with 
bulging eyes and shut lips. 

“They’ve been well trained, these Red Army men,” remarked 
a colleague. “Did you ever see such discipline?” 

But we had few doubts about the political future of M. 
Lovenescu. 

One thing was clear. The Soviet Government, if it had any 
plan for this country, was in no haste to reveal it. The evidence 
suggested that the Russians expected Rumania’s internal questions would solve themselves, in the later stages of the war itself. 
Already, without direct intervention of the Red Army to bring 
about specific reforms, the basis of the old order was collapsing 
under the weight of the miscalculations of its own leaders. The 
occupation simply created the conditions in which a new kind 
of Rumanian leadership could find birth. 


III 

Decay and Vitality 

The former riders, the fascists and their sympathizers, were 
already in flight and some had reached Bulgaria and Turkey. 
Their evacuation from Dorohoi and Botosani had been arranged 
by the Government and paid for in advance of the arrival of the 
Russians. Only a handful of landlords and capitalists, those few 
who had retired from political life after the advent of Antonescu, 
had dared stay behind. Since many of the former officials and 
army officers were closely identified with large property owners, 
their disappearance naturally meant new adjustments in ownership and management. For the present their shops and factories 
had been taken over by the prefectural government, which had 
rented them, in some cases, to committees of workmen. 

Trade unions had sprung back into life. Ninety percent of the 
workers of Botosani were members of one of the seven unions 
that had quickly reasserted themselves. The bakers’ union had 
compelled employers to abolish night work, to increase wages 
by fifty percent, and to provide a daily bread ration of 600 grams 
for each worker. What was perhaps more interesting, they had 
insisted that, in order to reduce costs, and so to make bread 
available for all, only one standard brand should be baked. They 
had won their point-with the Red Army backing them. 

Here the unions had their own football teams, their choirs, 
and an orchestra and library. There had been labor unions in 
the past, of course, but Antonescu had suppressed them in totalitarian manner, and interned their leaders. Union committeemen said that many of their former leaders were taken from 
prison and burned to death by the Germans in the notorious 
Rebiatsu camp. 

Even before Antonescu came to power, the merchants and 
factory owners were always able to bribe the police to suppress 
u s, according to Jacob Tippol, the Rumanian chairman of the 
trade unions association. “Now they can no longer do so. In the 
old days, the authorities took no interest in us, and the Army was 
always on the side of employers against labor.” 

Nothing was accomplished in Antonescu’s Rumania without 
bribery, it seemed, and it was customary to pay the police to 
ar rest your personal enemy. But you had to be sure your bribe 
Was bigger than the other fellow’s; otherwise he would outbid 
you and you would find yourself in jail. One man told of a case 
when thirty police officers were sent out to arrest thirty criminals, all known to be in town. Nineteen came back without their 
men, but presumably not empty-handed. A second batch was 
sent out and seven came back alone. It took four trips and four 
sets of policemen to bring in all the culprits. 

Under the Red Army labor was no longer persecuted by the 
police, and local leaders asserted that the Russians did not interfere in employer-employee disputes, “except that the Red Army 
is not used against labor.” (A very big exception!) Union men 
disclaimed membership in the Communist Party. I asked 
whether there were Communist sympathizers among them and 
their spokesman finally replied, “Remember, we are workers!” 

Surreptitiously, when we were in public places here and there, 
at luncheons or teas, or meeting the Chamber of Commerce, 
local people came up to tell us what was, or what they thought 
was, going on behind the scenes. Everybody seemed to speak 
English. One local merchant, who had been to America, told 
me the Russians had already organized two anti-Hitler Rumanian divisions, from among war prisoners. He also pointed out 
the leader of the local Communist Party, which he said was 
actively organizing labor, with the consent of the Russians. 

Another time a rather pretty Jewish girl introduced herself, 
speaking excellent English, to ask whether I had any recent 
copies of Time or the Saturday Evening Post, which she used 
to read regularly. All she wanted was to get out of Rumania? 
and she wanted me to get her a visa. “We are not poor, we are 
rich,” she emphasized. I had to explain that the State Department couldn’t be bribed. 

The prefectural governments also had the responsibility now 
for controlling the estates of absentee or emigre landlords, and 
this situation was handled like the problem presented by abandoned factories. Such estates were expropriated, in much the 
same manner as the guerrillas in North China utilized land belonging to owners who had sought shelter in Japanese-held 
cities. One nettling problem was what to do with Jewish proprietors who came back after the arrival of the Russians, to reclaim the lands which Antonescu had taken from them. 

“About 150 estates in this prefecture were formerly owned by 
Jews,” explained Col. Vladimir Chernizhev, the twenty-five-year- 
old commandant at Botosani. “Many of the landlords were unpopular with the peasants. It was decided not to return these 
estates to their former owners, since the law of the country prohibits it, anyway. The Red Army can’t change the law; it will 
have to wait till there’s a new government in Bucharest. In the 
meantime the land is being tilled by the peasants as a commune, 
and they pay the state half of their crop as rent.” 

Another surprise for the peasants was an astounding reduction 
in taxes. In Brauscauti village, near Dorohoi, the village chief, 
Alexei Georgi, told me that whereas farmers with ten hectares 
used to pay annual taxes of 1,000 Rumanian lei, or about ten 
American dollars, they now paid only 200 lei. 

“There was a lot of surtaxes, which have also been abolished,’ said Georgi. “Things are better now, you see; we pay 
less taxes.” 

War taxes had been abolished for city dwellers too. But in 
both the city and village the prefectural government, not the 
Russians, was given credit for this phenomenon. 

“You are too poor to pay now,” Georgi reported that the prefect had explained to him, “but after the war, your taxes will 
increase again.” So Georgi was keeping his fingers crossed. 

I talked with many Rumanian Jews. You couldn’t have avoided 
talking to them, if you had wanted to; they followed you down 
the streets with their fears, complaints and addresses of relatives 
m America. All of them seemed to be building their own hopes 
for the future on Anglo-American understanding of their problems. They were surprised and disappointed when told that 
there was no likelihood of American troops occupying Rumania. 
They admitted that they were no longer persecuted; they no 
longer liver in terror; they breathed as free men and women; 
diey were not starving. But still-“When will the Allies occupy 
Russians said they could not understand it. Why should these 
people want to leave their native land? Their land? Even the 
anti- Jewish laws still remained on the statute books, though in 
practice they were no longer completely observed. No wonder 
Jews were anxious about the future! How could they ever feel 
secure in Rumania again? 

There was something inexpressibly sad about the Rumanians 
here and you felt the poignance of it especially when you saw 
them in the mass, measured against the big, proud peasants of 
the Red Army. On the streets of the towns traffic was directed 
by tough, melon-breasted imported Russian girls? perhaps specially selected to impress the undersized Rumanians and Jews, 
who regarded them with awe and astonishment. These women 
seemed to symbolize for the local inhabitants all that propaganda had taught them was most awesome and fearful about 
Slavic Bolshevism. 

I remember how it was at a joint concert put on for our benefit, 
where pathetic dancing and singing by the local Jews, and especially their attempts to sing Rumanian folk songs (of a culture 
which had denied them any role), strangely contrasted with the 
storm of exuberant power, perfect co-ordination and magnificent voices of the Red Army performers and chorus on the same 
stage. On the one hand, a melancholy, leaderless, benighted people, whether Jews or Rumanians; on the other, bright-eyed, educated, emancipated Red peasants, sure of themselves and full of 
eager confidence for the future. 

Our mothers are our cannon. 

Our sisters are our swords , 

Our wives are our well-loaded rifles, 

Our grandfathers are our victories! 

It was an old Russian battle song composed by men of Kutuzov’s army when they met Napoleon at Borodino, and now it was 
back in favor again, along with Kutuzov and Suvorov. Rich young 
voices lifted it to the roof and the audience of local people 
seemed filled at once with admiration and trepidation before 
such vitality. At that moment you could not but feel that, however it may have been in the past, every Russian would in the 
future worship Stalin as the man who led Russia to the greatest 
military glory in its history. 

IV 



Rumanian Destiny 



At first you wondered how it was that so many Jews were left 
alive, but inquiry soon revealed that bribery and corruption and 
the deviousness of administration had extended even to the enforcement of Antonescu’s anti-Semitic laws. The Jews paid mil- 
lions of dollars in ransom money. In Botosani alone, in 1941, 
Antonescu’s agents extracted $600,000 from them for the Rumanian war chest and for their own pockets. The “contribution” 
was forthcoming after a trainload of Jews in neighboring Dorohoi, who had refused to fork over, were shipped to a concentration camp where half of them subsequently died of starvation. In 
1942, the Jews of Botosani paid again? four times the 1941 figure. In 1943, Antonescu squeezed $40,000,000 from the Jews of 
a U Rumania. 

How was it that so many Jews here still owned their shops and 
houses, after the anti-Semitic decrees? The Antonescu Government had confiscated all Jewish property and offered it for sale 
to non- Jewish Rumanians. But in practice many of the Rumanian 
Purchasers borrowed their money from the original Jewish owners, who continued to maintain occupation while paying “dividends” to their phony Rumanian partners. So if you were a Jew 
with money, you kept your freedom and even your property. 
But when you became a Jew without money, you went to a concentration camp or into a labor battalion. But not into the army. 

“We Jews were not allowed to become soldiers,” complained 
one ragged subject, recently demobilized from a labor battalion. 
“The Rumanians said we wouldn’t fight.” 

The hands-off policy of the Red Army extended to all re- 
ligious groups. At a Rumanian convent I noticed that the sisters 
had not thought it necessary even to remove from their walls a 
curious religious map, which showed the sphere of influence of 
the Rumanian church and state extending far into Russia as well 
as throughout the Balkans. Priests of the Old Believers, an orthodox sect of the former Russian state religion, told me they were 
fully satisfied with the treatment they were getting. They were 
even planning to send an investigating commission to Russia to 
see whether conditions were favorable for their return to the 
homeland. These Old Believers had left Russia two centuries 
ago, after a dispute with the church authorities of that period. 
At the invitation of Tsar Nicholas I, the sect once sent a mission 
to Russia before the last war. But they hadn’t liked the looks 
of things and so had stayed on here in Northern Rumania. 

Summing up, it seemed that life was no worse in Rumania for 
those who had stayed behind to greet the Russians, and that 
there were definite improvements for most people. The conservative peasant still had his land and kept more of the product 
of his labor. There were still plenty of cattle about. The worker 
had freedom and a sense of new power. The Jew was out of the 
concentration camps. He had equal rights and a chance to live. 
All had religious freedom; churches and their institutions were 
not being molested. 

There were plenty of indications, however, that the Russians 
would not tolerate a recrudescence of that kind of leadership 
which had driven Rumania into an alliance with Hitler. Elements in the population who supported Antonescu’s short-lived 
Rumanian rhapsody, the dream of greater empire built upon a 
Transnistria carved out of Russia, would also disappear from 
the political map of the Balkans. 

I ended a dispatch to the Saturday Evening Post about Red 
occupation of Rumania with the following paragraphs: 

“What, then, will be left to organize a new Rumanian society? 
Obviously the backbone of the old state will remain the backbone of the new: the hat-in-hand, meekly bowing peasantry. 
But now it may stiffen with a long-delayed realization that it has 
vertebrate possibilities of its own. After the fall of Bucharest the 
workers also will emerge, as in Botosani, from the recesses into 
which fascism has driven them, emerge timidly at first, and then 
with rising consciousness of power. 

“From the concentration camps will come some survivors of 
pre-fascism, the intellectuals, the anti-Hitler political leaders. 
They, and the suppressed Peasant, Liberal and Communist 
Parties, may together furnish a leadership that can make free 
and upright men from this dark serf-like material spread across 
these troubled mountains. 

“Whatever it is called, that new regime, like all regimes to 
come in this part of the world, inevitably will have to lean heavily on the f riendship and understanding of the giant to the east. 
First of all because it is to Russia that they will be most heavily 
indebted for reparations, and the way those payments are exacted can determine the fate of any future order in the Danubian 
countries. Secondly, and more fundamentally, because the Soviet Union , with its boundless energy and vitality, can no longer 
he excluded as a formative influence in the entire Balkan world’* 
The Soviet censor passed all of it, rather to my surprise. If I 
could have written perfectly frankly I would have altered nothing except the word “formative,” in the last sentence. “Major 
external influence” would have been a more exact description. 

And a few weeks later, when I met the Rumanian Communist 
"arty chieftain, Lucretiu Patrascanu, in Moscow, where he was 
sent by King Michael to negotiate an armistice for a new Rumanian regime, after the success of the Soviet offensive in Moldavia, everything he said seemed to me to confirm that earlier 
judgment. 


V 

Patrascanu & Co. 



Lucretiu Patrascanu made a good impression on all of us who 
saw him after he came above ground in Moscow. He was a dark 
and rather handsome Rmnanian lawyer, forty-two years old, 
who had served six terms in jail. He had, in fact, been in a concentration camp when the Russians invaded Rumania. King 
Michael secretly secured his release, and had him brought to the 
palace. There he conferred with leaders of the Labor and Liberal 
Parties, to advise the King and his Regent what course was left 
open for the country. Patrascanu was authorized to contact the 
Russians, in the King’s name. 

At that time, or perhaps even earlier, Moscow told the Rumanians that a speedy withdrawal from the war, and some help 
in throwing the Germans out of the Danube valley, would be rewarded by Soviet support for Rumania’s ancient claims to Transylvania, against Hungary. Apparently other Rumanian delegates, who were secretly meeting Allied diplomats in Cairo, 
were given the same assurances. Anyway it was largely that 
promise which decided the King to cast his lot with the Red 
Army and get rid of an unwelcome alliance with Hitler. In May 
he recognized the National Democratic Bloc, which was secretly 
formed among the Communists, Social Democrats, Peasant 
Party and Patriotic Union, to prepare for a coup d’Etat against 
Antonescu’s Government. 

However, the Red Army was unable to renew its major drive 
in the Balkans till late in the summer, at the conclusion of the 
Soviet offensive in the Baltic states and Eastern Poland. When 
Marshal Malinovsky’s Ukrainian troops began to drive down 
the Danube again, the Germans still had 660,000 troops in Rumania, but most of them were at the front. Patrascanu asked the 
King to increase his forces in the capital and August 26th was 
fixed as the date for an uprising. Antonescu got wind of it and 
three days in advance went to see the King to demand sweeping 
new powers. Michael acted very decisively, however; instead of 
submitting he ordered the Palace Guards to arrest Antonescu 
and members of his Cabinet. 

Raging, the German commandant paid a visit to the King at 
two a.m., to demand a renewal of the pledge of alliance with 
Hitler. The King declined. Two hours later fighting began in the 
streets of Bucharest? and four days later, to everybody’s astonishment including the Rumanians’, the Germans withdrew in 
defeat. Whatever you could say about the poor performance of 
Rumanian troops up to that moment, it had to be admitted that 
the behavior of the insurrectionists in Bucharest? in which thousands of half-trained workers took part? was brilliantly successful. It saved many Russian fives. A masterpiece of planning, it 
was the result of full liaison which anti-Hitlerite Rumanians established four months in advance with the Red Army. It offered 
a glaring contrast with the disastrous uprising in Warsaw led by 
the anti-Soviet General Bor, who had no previous understanding 
with the Red Army whatsoever. From the time of the Bucharest 
coup onward the whole German position in the Balkans was 
doomed. Before the year was out the doughty little Ukrainian 
Marshal, Rodion Malinovsky, who had been chasing the Nazis 
ever since Stalingrad, would enter Belgrade and shake hands 
with Marshal Tito. 

Patrascanu accepted the armistice in the name of the King, 
and under the circumstances the terms seemed surprisingly 
moderate. Rumania had to pay an indemnity of 300 million dollars, no more than that imposed on Finland. She lost no territory 
and earned a chance, by joining in an alliance with Russia, of 
getting back her pre-war control of Transylvania, which Hitler 
had handed over to Hungary’s Admiral Horthy. Patrascanu 
seemed to think he had made a fair bargain. 

One afternoon a group of us had tea with Patrascanu’s chic, 
vivacious and smartly dressed French-speaking wife, who didn’t 
look any more like the highly sophisticated Communist (which 
she was) than Gloria Vanderbilt, ex Cicco. 

“How long will King Michael last in the new Rumania?” 
someone asked her. 

“Perhaps two years,” she suggested. 

“And how long will it be before the Communists? Rumanians, 
of course? are running the country?” 

“Two years,” she said very sweetly. 




CPIAPTER THREE 

Polish Interlude 


I Preface for Skeptics 

ORDINARILY, a writer ought to eschew subjects already fully 
reported in the daily press. But once in a while you run across 
a story so sublime in its witness to the divinity of man, or so 
loathsome as to make the meanest beast seem clean and wholesome by comparison, that it renews itself through the continued 
interest or incredulity of the public, and through the subjective 
experience of the reporter. 

Maidanck was such a story, in the second category. For Poland 
and Russia, at least, Maidanek and the ghosts that throng around 
it would be a living presence at the peace tables to harden man’s 
heart to the inevitable dismemberment of Germany. Quite apart 
from its scientific interest, it is important for Americans to remember it, and in all conscience I cannot shirk my part in contributing to the record of it. Russians will never forget it. To 
them it is one of the gravest of many scores to settle. 

When the history of this war is written, Maidanek may best 
epitomize the inner nature of Nazi philosophy and mark its most 
brilliant success in perverting the very virtues of a once-great 
People into the service of a machinery of crime almost too monstrous for the human mind to accept. Even after seeing the abundant evidence, hearing the statements of eye-witnesses and listening to the confessions of a few of the murderers themselves, 
there is a voice in man taught to revere human life as sacred 
that continues to say all this could not happen. Yet when I look 
at my notes, taken at Lublin, during a trip to liberated Poland, 
when I review the accumulation of testimony, intelligence informs me, as it does every other observer I know who has had this 
unenviable opportunity, that the main story of this death factory, to which the Nazis themselves unofficially referred as the 
Camp for Extermination, has been truthfully reported. 

How many people were destroyed at Maidanek? I have no 
way of knowing precisely. Two Germans who worked in the 
camp told us that on a single day, November 3rd of 1943, between 17,000 and 20,000 men, women and children were obliterated there. They agreed also that “hundreds” at a time had 
been taken out of the gas chambers on various days. Dr. SiengaIwicz, a Polish toxicologist and professor of forensic medicine of 
Lublin University, told me that they had identified, by chemical analysis, a total of 1,034 meters of human ashes recovered 
from graves and from near-by fields, which he estimated to represent the remains of perhaps 1,000,000 corpses. 

The Soviet-Polish Commission of scientists and laymen, of 
which Dr. Siengalwicz was a member, was headed by Andrejez 
Vitos, then vice-president of the Polish Committee of National 
Liberation. It spent thousands of hours investigating the mountains of evidence, and its final report, covering every aspect of 
the camp, will doubtless be studied by pathologists, psychologists, criminologists and other scientists for years to come. Many 
of them, too, will probably refuse to believe it. 

But not I, and not anyone who saw Maidanek and all the evidence of its horror. For us, nothing could erase the negative 
which re-created the whole picture in most convincing manner. 
This crowning achievement of Nazi totalitarianism, executed 
with German efficiency, was in a way far more frightening in its 
ultimate implications for mankind than the record of any rival 
killers in history. 

The whole abattoir was still there when I went to Lublin at the 
end of August. The vast camp, enclosed by electrically charged 
barbed wire, the 200-odd barracks and buildings which were 
pens where transient human cattle were herded for slaughter, 
the chamber where they were gassed? they were open to public 
scrutiny now. Russians and Poles led then soldiers and recruits 
through the maze to indoctrinate them for battle. The open-air 
brick ovens fitted with electric blowers where corpses were cremated, the disinterred bodies of earlier victims? men, women 
and children killed by other means? and finally the tons of 
human ashes scattered about the fields in which the Nazis grew 
choice cabbages for their table. I saw all that. 

I knew of course that faked evidence could sometimes appear 
very convincing, but years of experience with partisan propagandists had enabled me to smell out a “planted” scene as a 
mouse smells out a piece of cheese. Even when confronted with 
an obviously genuine atrocity, however, I often refrained from 
reporting it, simply because I had learned that there were always 
hundreds of people in America who would never behove man 
capable of such depravity and would start long correspondence 
with your editor, trying to prove that you were a fool or a liar. 

One of history’s most completely documented cases of rapine, 
torture and murder occurred at Nanking, in 1937, when the 
Japanese slew thousands of Chinese after taking the capital. The 
report on that atrocity was prepared by an international committee of highly respected American and European eye-witnesses, including doctors, professors and clergymen, and it was 
signed by the chairman, who happened to be a German Nazi 
whose Fiihrer was allied with the Japanese. Nevertheless, hundreds of Americans obviously did not believe it. When I came 
home from China in 1941 many people referred to my quotations from that document and said, “That wasn’t really true, was 
it?” Skepticism is a healthy thing, up to a point, but this was 
simply stupidity. It all seemed to go back somehow to the postwar debunking of reports about German baby-killers in Belgium. Since then many a misguided American has thought he 
was being sophisticated by refusing to believe the most irrefutable evidence of Nazi degeneracy. 
But Maidanek was something different in my experience and 
it was something every decent person had to know about, because there was a point here of new and clinical interest. It was 
the diabolical system and efficiency of it, the comprehensive, 
centrally directed planning, that for the first time made a totalitarian modem industry out of the reduction of the human being 
from an upright ambulatory animal to a kilogram of gray ashes. 
No slaughterhouse was ever better organized for its purpose. 
All by-products were utilized. Nothing was wasted. 

Everywhere in the chain of operations lay the characteristic 
hand of the German master of order, efficiency and economy, 
his complete absorption in the mechanics of the tasks before 
him, his rigid adherence to the principle of thoroughness in all 
things. It happened that two of my own great-grandparents were 
Germans, and from that side of my family I heard in my youth a 
great deal about those German virtues. Indeed, no one can say 
that American society has not benefited from them, either. But 
here at Lublin you got a complete perversion of the historic 
genius of a race, with method and means becoming everything, 
action completely dominating imagination, and the end itself 
losing all significance for the automatons bringing it about. 

That was the phenomenon that fascinated me about Maidanek: the fact that it is perfectly possible to co-ordinate the 
utmost scientific order and means with the utmost barbarism of 
ends. Here human conscience was absolved of all guilt by the 
magic words “Orders from Berlin.” “Kill! Kill! Kill!” screamed 
Goebbels for the record of all time. “Not you shall answer for 
this, but I.” And the blockheads who listened to him spat on 
their hands and obeyed. 

II 

Nazi Death Plant 

Maidanek was neatly laid out for killing, an impressive collection of buildings in a spacious setting. It had its own shops, 
its many miles of motor roads winding between high watch 
towers; it even had its own fire department. No one must bum 
before his time. In front of the residence of the commandant 
was a garden. Outside the camp offices was another garden. In 
the middle of it stood a ten-foot-high replica of a medieval castle 
which served as a fountain. It was built by Jewish prisoners, 
under the lash of Gestapo gangsters, from Jewish gravestones. 
In places you could still see the engraved Hebrew characters. 

Prisoners sent to Lublin from all parts of Europe were instructed to bring everything they owned. They were to begin 
a new life in a “new settlement,” some were told. Trustingly, 
they shipped their trunks of belongings, or relatives sent them, as 
instructed. Apparently none of these trunks ever saw the camp 
at all, but were unloaded in a Lublin warehouse? of which more 
later. In this way Hitler pried loose the last personal wealth of 
bis victims. 

Many had already been worked and starved into emaciation 
before reaching Maidanek and little labor power was lost 
through their segregation here. Even after they reached the 
camp, however, the still relatively able-bodied were held aside 
for more work. They helped to erect new buildings, which were 
constantly being added after August, 1941, until by 1943 the 
camp had a capacity of 40,000. When the sick and the lame fell 
exhausted at their labor, they were beaten and marked for 
speedy extermination. 

Witnesses testified that various means were adopted to liquidate prisoners. The gas chambers could kill from 150 to 200 
people in five minutes and were the main execution cells. Sometimes prisoners were clubbed or hanged. Sometimes SS men 
casually kicked or beat the life out of selected victims. German 
political prisoners were always shot, I was told by captured 
Nazis, while gas chambers were generally used for the others. 

But Jews, Germans and other Europeans were all robbed in 
common and were all fed to the same ovens. The principle crematorium consisted of ten large ovens, with a capacity of some 
1,400 bodies daily. Near the ovens still lay piles of tin turns. These 
were formerly used to receive ashes from the fires, which were 
then sold to people foolish enough to believe that they were 
buying the remains of their loved ones. Such filled urns netted 
the Nazis 5,000 Polish zlotys each. Nothing was wasted. 

Not far from the Maidanek camp I visited some of the mass 
graves, where the victims of the Nazis had been buried in days 
before more efficient methods were adopted by the Gestapo. In 
the now opened pits lay hundreds of partly decomposed bodies 
of men, women, children and babies, many still wearing their 
rotting Polish and Russian native dresses. Some of the corpses 
had smashed skulls and were horribly mutilated and disfigured; 
others had been stabbed to death; some had bullet holes in them. 
It was an incredibly hideous sight and the stench was beyond 
description. From other graves, already emptied, the Nazis had 
removed corpses for cremation in the ovens of Maidanek, when 
the advance of the Red Army had threatened to expose the 
handiwork of the death factory. Their activity had been interrupted and never completed. A few minutes of it was all I could 
stand, but for days afterward the stink seemed part of my 
clothes. 

At Maidanek, the bulk of the ashes was strewn upon the Nazis’ 
vegetable fields and the commandant’s flower gardens. Gold 
fillings were removed from the teeth of the corpses, and sometimes from five prisoners. Serviceable clothing was sent to the 
large warehouse, converted from an unfinished theater owned 
by the Catholic Church. Even rags were fumigated and preserved, for buttons and bits of cloth. And not far from the ovens 
I saw the most sickening display of all, in this evidence of mass 
murder. 

Doubtless you have read about the building, some fifty feet 
wide by one hundred feet long, which was devoted solely to old 
shoes. Hundreds of thousands of pairs of them lay there, closely 
packed down, footwear of every description, and each pair a 
tragic history of a vanished owner. There were babies’ tiny shoes 
and children’s boots, hundreds of them. There were little red 
slippers, gold evening shoes, the high laced boots of an elderly 
woman, the worn sandals of peasants, the frayed valenki of 
Russians and Poles, rubbers from Akron? footwear from Paris, 
Berlin, Vienna, Warsaw, Prague, Antwerp, Rotterdam, Madrid 
and Moscow. Here mute testimony corroborated the evidence 
of Nazi guards, the passports and other records I saw, that people from infants to octogenarians were wiped out. Most of all I 
remember the shoe of a crippled woman, with a built-up sole 
six inches high. Near by were a truss and a knee-length brace. All 
these items had been kept for the shoemakers’ old leather. Nothing was wasted. 


III Nothing Was Wasted 

Downtown, in Lublin, a warehouse of four floors was filled 
with the worn but fumigated intimate belongings of thousands 
of people. Everything was carefully inventoried. There was a 
section devoted to women s underclothing of all kinds, silk panties and brassieres in one room, overcoats in another; corsets in 
one department, stockings in another. One room was crowded 
with children’s garments, from swaddling clothes to woolen 
knickerbocker suits. There was a corner piled high with babies’ 
cracked and chipped chamber pots. 

I examined two trunks crammed with arch supporters, and 
there were even wooden arms, legs, crutches and canes in various stages of wear. In one department I saw assorted medicines, 
partly used tubes of toothpaste, old combs and vanity cases, nail 
files and scissors. One whole shelf was devoted to children’s 
books and toys, smudged by small, loving hands. 

“One day I saw 157 Polish children gassed to death,” Hans 
Stalp, a German prisoner who had been a guard at Maidanek, 
told me. On another day, Nazi Officer Anton Thermos admitted 
to us he had seen about 500 women and children gassed to death. 
On a second occasion, he saw the bodies of 300 children taken 
from the gas chambers. 

Ledgers and stacks of inventory sheets were found in offices 
of the warehouse. Down to the last spool of it, the Nazis knew 
how much used thread they had on a given day. “Mention a date 
and I’ll tell you what was here,” said the bespectacled Polish 
theological student who rummaged through these files. “Well? 
Let us take March 31, 1944. Eighty thousand women’s blouses; 
160,089 pieces of assorted cloth; 316,000 pieces of ladies’ underwear.” And so on. 

The file of Nazi correspondence produced interesting documentation from Berlin, the real pay-off in this novel factory-to-consumer industry. There were various orders for equipment for 
German settlers in the new empire conquered in Poland and the 
Ukraine. I saw a soiled letter from headquarters requesting garments for several thousand young supermen. The books were 
expertly kept, with German thoroughness. At the end of any day 
the commandant could advise Hitler just how many worn rompers and ladies’ chemises were in stock, and how many had been 
shipped out. Who would have thought that supermen would 
stoop to rag-picking? But the motto was “nothing to be wasted.” 

Everything was taken care of here, everything but the last 
act. Incredibly, these industrialists of death, so systematic about 
everything else, neglected the one thing most important of all. 
At the last moment, they fled without completely destroying the 
evidence, and thus nullified all their previous elaborate efforts. 
Camp Commandant Thuman suddenly disappeared, and the remaining SS murder technicians were left sans Fiihrer. Some kind 
of order must have finally come through from Berlin. Herr Moosveld, the crematorium Fiihrer, managed to set fire to some of the 
abattoir buildings and to his own house, in which stood the bed 
where he had slept peacefully not ten feet from the incineration 
ovens. Winters are cold in Lublin, but Moosveld’s quarters were 
very snug. He took his bath in water heated by the fires that 
burned his victims. 

Yet it was a disorderly retreat. Enough evidence? far more 
than I can describe here? was left behind to incriminate everyone from Hitler to the dark little Obersturmfiihrer, Theodore 
Scholen, a Nazi Party member and an SS man, whom the Russians inconveniently interrupted outside Lublin, on his way to 
Berlin. This fellow Scholen, to whom I talked, told of having frequently seen bodies carried through the camp. He recalled 
that from 18,000 to 20,000 people were killed on November 3, 
1943? Belgians, Greeks, Italians and many others, besides a vast 
number of Jews, Poles and Russians. But it was only now, as he 
looked back on it all, that Herr Scholen realized that the whole 
thing was actually an extermination camp. 

As for himself, Scholen stoutly maintained he had never taken 
part in the actual killings. He was kind to the prisoners. The 
most he admitted doing was the occasional removal of gold fillings from live prisoners’ teeth, in search of hidden diamonds. 
But his extractions, he said, were always painlessly performed. 

“Then who was actually responsible, Obersturmfuhrer Scholen?” I asked him. 

“Berlin,” he answered, without batting an eye. Not the camp 
commandant, not Scholen, and none of the nineteen young 
idealists who once thought they were riding on the “wave of the 
future,” and who worked under Scholen. 

“We always acted on orders from Berlin,” Scholen complacently explained. Didn’t that make it all clear? 

“Has it occurred to you that you yourself will be tried for your 
share in these crimes?” I asked him. 

Ferret-like eyes blinked in astonishment. “That’s absurd! I 
only carried out orders. As for a trial, I’ve done nothing. I’m absolutely blameless,” concluded Scholen. 

A year earlier I had been staying in a billet over in Scotland 
one night, listening to a young American flier just back from 
Italy, where he had been bombing the German lines. I heard 
him talk for some time with an RAF man who lay near us, in this 
vein: that he didn’t believe all that “propaganda” about Nazi 
brutality; it was probably all lies. 

“Why, I met some of their fliers we had captured, and they 
were fellows just about like us. Under other circumstances, you 
wouldn’t mind introducing them to your girl. They say they are 
fighting for an ideal and they are ready to die for it, and that’s 
just what we’re doing. It’s too bad to have to kill them.” 
We have toughened up a lot since then. Probably that young 
captain has, too, and I hope he read about Maidanek; it’s tough 
on a man to have to kill fellow idealists and that might make it 
easier for him to sleep at night. But just as I expected, my editor 
got plenty of “it-couldn’t-happen” letters from skeptical American amateur criminologists. From where they sat they knew it 
was all a Russo-Polish plot. The back of my hand to them. Sixteen quite hard-boiled American correspondents went to Maidanek and not one of us came away unconvinced. Not one of us 
shed a tear for Herr Scholen and his accomplices, either, when 
the Polish courts tried them some weeks later and hung them 
until dead. 

Here is a macabre thing, though, that belongs in the unclassified paradoxes department. Weeks afterward, when I was in 
Moscow, the Lublin Poles sent a committee to visit the British 
and American ambassadors, presenting a list of Poland’s relief 
needs. Most of the items were obvious necessities, but one request dumbfounded our diplomats. It read: 12 skeletons, for the 
Lublin University’s medical laboratories. The Poles explained 
that the Germans had destroyed or carried off all their pre-war 
skeletons. 

IV 

The Poles Apart 

In Lublin, then headquarters of the Polish Liberation Committee and the Polish administrative committee which the Red 
Army had recognized as the sole authority on liberated Polish 
territory, I met Edward Boleslaw Osubka-Morawski for the first 
time. He later became vice-chairman of the new Polish Government which Moscow recognized soon after Warsaw was reoccupied. Here also I met General Boni Rola-Zimerski, head of 
the new Polish Army. 

Rola-Zimerski gave a long detailed account of Red Army operations in which he had taken part, leading up to the capture 
of Praga, a suburb of Warsaw on the east bank of the wide Vistula River. He stated categorically that the Warsaw uprising, 
which was launched on the joint responsibility of the London 
Poles of the regime-in-exile, and General Bor, head of the underground Polish Home Army, was begun without prior consultation or liaison of any kind with the Red Army. He then explained 
that from what he, as leader of the Polish People’s Army (a rival 
of the anti-Soviet Home Army), knew of Red Army plans, they 
had never included a frontal attack on Warsaw. He indicated 
that the Red Army would eventually take the Polish capital in 
an encirclement movement, and that the forces under General 
Bor, then fighting in Warsaw, were doomed to ultimate extermination by the Germans. 

Later information, and real events, supported Rola-Zimerski’s 
appraisal of the tragedy of Warsaw. The Germans had built up 
an extremely powerful defense system around the city; at one 
point as many as eighty separate lines of pillboxes and trenches 
were prepared. A near-crossing of the Vistula by the Russians, 
who had already paid a very heavy price to occupy Praga, could 
have been attempted only by a commander prodigal with the 
lives of his men; and even then that suicidal attempt might have 
failed. Wisely, the Red Army did not mount a further offensive 
till the following January, when the river had frozen hard and 
the marshes and swamps north and south of the capital gave a 
firm track for tanks and heavy-weapon carriers. Whether by 
chance or by design, this final move to complete the Red Army’s 
liberation of Poland came also at a moment highly favorable for 
us, as it brought strategic aid to our beleaguered forces in Western Europe at the height of von Rundstedt’s fierce counter-offensive into Belgium. 

As Rola-Zimerski had predicted, Warsaw itself was by-passed 
and outflanked by the main Russian forces and its garrison eventually capitulated when it was entirely surrounded. But meanwhile the city had been leveled to the ground, the Polish Home 
Army had been destroyed, and several hundred thousand citizens had lost their lives in a hopeless and futile insurrection. 
Looking back now on the London Poles’ fierce outcry that the 
Russians had “betrayed” them by not storming Warsaw and 
bringing salvation to General Bor, who had given the signal for 
a rising without even consulting our own chief s-of-staff liaison 
in Britain, it seems dear that their own ineptitude of leadership 
and their fatally misguided sense of diplomacy were chiefly to 
blame. 

In Poland itself the prestige of the exiled government rapidly 
disintegrated after the Warsaw fiasco. Hundreds of Bor’s former 
officers began to join the new Polish People’s Army. In Lublin 
we met two of the earliest of these disillusioned patriots to come 
over. One of them, Colonel Tarnova, had been commander of 
all Bor’s Home Army security troops. He reported that even 
before the uprising he and many of his 2,500 officers had openly 
disagreed with Bor’s plans for two sound military reasons: 1) 
their means were insufficient to the task; and 2) they had no 
understanding with the Red Army. Tarnova had, in fact, resigned his command and fled from Warsaw with the intention of 
reaching liberated Poland, where he had intended to communicate with (then) Premier Mikolajczyk of the regime-in-exile, to 
request him to postpone the uprising until liaison could be established with the Allies. It was, however, already too late to interfere when he reached Lublin. Now he agreed completely when 
General Rola-Zimerski declared: 

“We are deeply convinced that Bor’s order was given purely 
for political reasons. . . . The plan of the Home Army all along 
has been to appear suddenly in cities being occupied by the Red 
Army and only at the last moment, in order to assume power. 
Their mistake was that they thought they could operate in Warsaw independent of the will of the Red Army.” 

The Home Army’s policy was thus the military reflection of 
the London Polish Government’s political strategy, which continued to the last to refuse to recognize one basic and inescapable 
fact about the nation’s destiny. It was simply that Poland could 
be restored to greatness only as a result of Red Army victory 
and heavy sacrifice of Russian blood. Therefore, only a government prepared to purge itself of all its anti-Soviet elements, and 
to co-operate fully with new pro-Soviet groupings bound to arise 
on the spot, in the wake of Russian victory, would be able to 
take power in the new Poland. Instead the London Poles steadfastly clung to a dozen myths and hopes rooted in their deep 
anti-Soviet prejudices and wish-fancies of the past, until at last 
Mikola jczyk left them and they lost the support of his Peasant 
Party, their most important political asset. From then on it was 
only a matter of time till Moscow? and after a decent face-saving 
interval, Britain and America? would recognize the new provisional Polish regime headed by Beirut and Osubka-Morawski, 
which later entered the ruins of Warsaw. 

All this was already implicit in tire conditions which existed 
when I first visited Poland. It was obvious also that the Polish 
Liberation Committee was, in reality, carrying out a political 
renovation so sweeping in character that it could only have been 
accomplished as a result of heavy revolutionary civil war had it 
not been done under the wings of the Red Army. Some aspects 
of civil war were present, anyway. Rola-Zimerski told us that his 
troops were disarming all members of the Home Army. Other 
Poles, attached to the Liberation Committee, admitted quite 
frankly that hundreds of their countrymen, who had refused to 
recognize the Committee’s authority and still insisted on obeying 
only the radioed orders of the London government? which called 
for non-co-operation? were being interned as ‘enemies of the 
people.” Remnants of the Home Army, hiding in the forests and 
villages, carried on a war of sabotage and assassination against 
both the Russians and their Polish allies. 

The Polish Liberation Committee was then still weak and the 
four parties which had joined still needed the help of Mikolajczyk’s Peasant Party in order to command a mass following. 
But it was clear that their land-reform program would soon win 
a substantial base among the peasantry while their direct appeal 
to the urban workers would soon give them organized control 
of labor. No exiled government, depending on Anglo-American 
intervention, could long compete with such a regime on Polish 
soil. With the support which they knew would follow when Stalin 
actually tinned over East Prussian and Silesian territory to Polish 
sovereignty, the political leaders of this first pro-Soviet regime 
in history had good reason to expect an early stabilization of the 
New Order whose foundations they were now busily laying in 
the tracks of the Red Army. 

With liberated Poland and Rumania thus maturing as political 
prototypes, and the armistice terms imposed on other defeated 
Axis satellites available for study, it was already possible, by the 
autumn of 1944, to trace in broad outline the shape of things to 
come across the face of Eastern Europe? including, eventually, 
Germany. Let us examine this pattern that followed wherever 
the Red Army conquered. 
