What of Our Future?

By BERNARD M. BARUCH

HAVE WE AMERICANS TAKEN ON MORE THAN WE CAN
HANDLE IN SPONSORING THE NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY?
WHAT WILL OUR VAST WORLD-WIDE COMMITMENTS DO TO
OUR CHERISHED WAY OF LIFE? AMERICA'S "ELDER STATESMAN"
DISCUSSES THESE VITAL QUESTIONS CANDIDLY.

MANY letters have come to me
anxiously inquiring about the
future. "Will I lose my job in
another depression? " writes one
worker. A housewife complains,
"With prices and taxes so high, how can
we save for our child's education?" A college
president is troubled at shrinking endowment
funds, mayors and governors over
rising government costs. From the student
editor of a high-school newspaper comes the
inquiry, " What can we do now to guarantee
our security later?"
Answering these letters has not been
easy. I have never believed in issuing reassuring
statements simply to bolster confidence.
The sensible course, I decided, was
to take stock of where America stands at
this critical juncture of history, why there
should be so much uneasiness, what must
Le done to restore that sense of security in
the future for which all of us-workers,
farmers, housewives, college presidents,
mayors, governors, students and others-
are groping.
Usually when 1 need to do tall thinking,
I fly south to Hobcaw, in South Carolina.
Winyah Bay washes by one side of my
house. Pines and live oaks shade the other
sides. Many brains work better when
brought into communion with nature. In
my case, nothing so mystical is involved.
What makes Hobcaw so perfect a think
spot is that it has no telephone. Washington,
alas, is a city strung together with telephone
wires. Everyone is too busy to think.
The typical top-ranking official chases conferences
through the day, sinking wearily
to fitful sleep, a pad and pencil at his bedside.
As a result of my stock-taking, I believe
there is a path of courage and wisdom out
of the maze of fears in which we now seem
trapped.
Let us begin with the basic cause of the
jitters spreading through the country-the
absence of peace. Most of us sense how
preparations against another dread war
distort our lives. Not so generally appreciated
is what revolutionary changes in our
habitual ways are being forced by our being
neither at war nor at peace.
The existence of a continuous state of
near-war clashes violently with every American
tradition. I remember my teachers
extolling Cincinnatus, twice made dictator
to save Rome, only to return to bis plow
when the enemy had been routed. That is
how Americans were brought up to regard
war-as a temporary interruption of normal,
peaceful pursuits to which we return
as quickly aa we can. This is reflected in our
Constitution, with its division of powers
between Congress and the President, in
how we swing from all-out mobilization for
war to all-out demobilization for peace, in
our suspicions of standing armies and overstrong
government. Our whole national
make-up assumes a sharp division between
war and peace, BS with day and night. But
now the cold war has thrust us into an
around-the-clock arctic twilight, with no
telling where peace begins, where war ends.
Our first futile reaction to this perilously
new plight has been to try to spend our way
out. The military budget has jerked feverishly
to $15,000,000,000 a year, nearly a third
as much aa our entire cost for World War I.
Nearly a score of countries are receiving
American aid. Yet, although taxes exact
one of every four dollars Americans earn,
and grave domestic needs in health, education
and housing are neglected, nowhere
have we achieved a decision in the peacemaking.
Naturally, concern mounts over
where it will all end. Is there no limit to the
demands upon us? How much can we do-
and for how long-without wrecking ourselves
and taking the world with us?
These burdens seem to have "just
growed." When the British Government
dumped the civil war in Greece into our
Treasury, pleading a shortage of dollars,
I asked one high State Department official,
"Doesn't this mean we shall also have to
pay Britain's share of the German occupation?"
He replied, "Oh, no."
Within a year we were assuming the bulk
of Britain's burden in Germany. At no time
have we faced squarely what the total
peace-waging required. We have drifted
reluctantly, bit by bit, into ever-deeper involvement, deceiving ourselves with the hope that
each new commitment would be the last. Every
"crisis'* abroad, real or manufactured, shakes our
economy.
To regain the control, now so largely lost, over our
foreign policy, America must take its stand. That
was the gist of my testimony before the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee on January 19, 1948,
on the Marshall Plan. The official propaganda
line was how cheap a bargain it would be if peace
could be bought for a few billions in economic
aid. When I bluntly declared such aid would be
meaningless unless accompanied by a political,
economic and defense union of Western Europe, supported
by a firm American promise to go to war in
event of aggression, some officials recoiled in dismay.
They feared the public might he frightened off if it
realized the full import of what we were undertaking.
Other officials told me privately they were pleased I
had voiced what they felt unable to say.
The debate on the North Atlantic Treaty recalls a
dramatic incident of years ago. The scene was
Woodrow Wilson's bedroom in the White House.
The President had been stricken a few weeks before.
I was the first person outside his family to see
him. He was lying in bed when I came in.
Several senators had urged that I tell the President
the Senate would ratify the Treaty of Versailles if he
agreed to a reservation watering down Article 10
of the Covenant of the League of Nations which
bound the signers to "respect and preserve as
against external aggression the territorial integrity
and existing political independence" of all League
members. President Wilson snapped, "Article Ten is
the heart of the League! This proposal is a nullification,
not a reservation! If I should accept that, I'd
he false to every young man who lies dead in
Flanders!"
Any "reservation" to the North Atlantic Treaty
is meaningless. The pact will be no less an act of
matrimony without the word "obey"-even if it
does not explicitly bind us to go to war. If this marriage
is to succeed, we shall have to kiss good-by to
our former carefree bachelor habits. One can sympathize
with the desire to leave Europe under no illusion
as to the obligations we are assuming. But it is,
more important that the American people be left
with no illusions. We already are committed to resist
aggression by every means, including war.
Without such a commitment, the United Nations'
charter has no significance-nor any of our policies
since the war's end.
No mere gesture of signing a treaty will avert a
teat of America's determination to resist aggression.
The trial may come through flagrant invasion or in
the form of civil war-with Germany the likely
arena. Sooner or later, we must expect that an effort
will he made to rejoin partitioned Germany. It may
come as a climax to peace negotiations over Germany
or after the occupying powers have withdrawn.
Whether the first warning flames of such an
outbreak can be kept from enveloping the world will
hinge on how promptly we mobilize necessary economic,
military and spiritual power against war.
Again, it was Hitler's practice to point an air force
at a neighbor and demand, " Your freedom or your
life." Some peaceful nation, confronted with such an
ultimatum in the future, will ask, " If we fight, can we
count on America? Will your aid reach us in time?"
No nation will invite the obliteration of its cities
while we debate whether it is our war. To reach our
allies in time, we must know for what we will fight
and be prepared to mobilize before war has begun.
Whatever its form, whenever it comes, this trial of
our ability to mobilize in advance of war will be the
great testing of our civilization. On it will hinge the
fate of America and the world. Domestic communists
and other fifth columnists will strive to paralyze
us from acting hy exploiting our natural desire for
peace and isolation. But our most fearful torments
will rise from modern warfare's totalitarian image
being the hideous opposite of our free, individualistic
ways. To the extent that we are compelled to mobilize,
we would have to accept the hateful regimentations
and denials which war itself entails. Young
men might have to be drafted while the rest of us
registered at rationing boards. The production of
automobiles, television sets and other delights might have to he curtailed; limits imposed on prices,
profits, wages; taxes heavily increased and numerous
other Government controls instituted.
Many of these disciplines were resisted during the
last war while American men and women were fighting
and dying. How much greater will be the temptation,
when war has not yet broken out, to "wait and
see." Yet it is because today's necessity is to prevent
war that we must be ready to mobilize during
"peace." If America's great power is to be used to
avert war-as well as to win it-we must take our
stand before bullets have begun to fly.
How poignant for a democratic people to be forced
to embrace the regimentation they hate to preserve
the freedom they love! The critical task of American
statesmanship is to prepare us not to fail that test, 
without turning us into a perpetually mobilized,
garrison state.
Neither Washington nor Lincoln faced a more trying
dilemma, and it would he well to fix in mind the
basic contradiction with which we shall he wrestling.
In our world there prevails an inexorable continuity
between war and peace, hut our cherished "American
way " denies that continuity. In neither our thoughts
nor our institutions is there a see-through between
war and peace. The most tragic example, of course,
was our overhasty demohilization. Even after suffering
1,000,000 casualties and expending $330,000,-
000,000 in the last war, we still could not hold together
our power until the peace, for which that
blood and treasure were spilled, had been written.
This continuity of war and peace extends far beyond
the definition of the Prussian, Clausewitz, that
"war is politics continued by other means." Clausewitz
wrote in an age of limited warfare. With total
war, the continuity of war and peace stretches beyond
matters of policy to all life. The fact is that
there no longer is a gap of time between war and
peace. Hitler's mobilization began years before he
invaded Poland. The war's devastation still rolls on.
Time! The mainspring of American behavior has
been our having more of it than other nations. Our
isolation, individualism, form of government, attitude
toward war, all ticked in rhythm. War was
apart from peace; America apart from the world;
each American apart from his Government, which
held only the authority jealously yielded to it by
the people.
The collapse of European power, the atomic bomb
and other ocean-shrinking weapons, along with
the necessity to prevent war, have eliminated the
buffer of time which cushioned this detachment.
We now must develop a new sense of interrelationship
between war and peace, between home
and abroad, between each of us and "those bureaucrats
in Washington."
To make and keep the peace, in short, we must
alter our most deeply ingrained traits. It is not that
the "American way" isn't the best in the world-it
emphatically is-but that our onetime "detached
and distant situation," in George Washington's
phrase, has so shrunken. Already draft boards are
sitting for the first time in advance of war. The
North Atlantic Pact is a continuing, not temporary,
alliance. These are only beginning adjustments.
Later I will discuss the gantlet of dangers which
will have to he run -the necessity to strengthen
government and to give military matters an emphasis
beyond anything traditionally American. There
is this to buoy us through our ordeal: Should we
succeed in fitting ourselves to this concept of war
and peace as an interconnecting stream, it might
open real possibilities of a settlement with Russia.
So deep is the distrust between our two countries
that one cannot hope for a dream understanding
which would permit us to relax and forget about
war. Any possible agreement will have to be guarded
vigilantly. But if fear of the flood cannot be banished,
perhaps we can erect restraining dams to
serve as outposts which, if breached, would alert us
to mobilize. Behind such dams, our lives could be
organized with less tension than at present. In time
and with demonstrations of the pledged word faithfully
kept, a more satisfactory structure of peace
might be built.
Our peace policy cannot be based on shifts in 
Soviet personnel. No nation can be trusted to honor
a treaty which hurts its vital interests. We must
strive to draw a line between Russia's aggressive
designs and her legitimate aspirations for reparations,
access to the sea and security, balancing them
with the safeguards indispensable for our own security
and that of the other free nations. In brief, we
must decide what we are for as well as what we are
against, both for what we will fight and on what
terms we will settle. 
That is the first requirement for peace-to know
our own minds. The second is to organize ourselves
to see through whatever peace policy is determined
upon.
So far, we have done neither, which largely explains
the deepening uncertainty in the nation.
From an economy bursting at its seams, we have
been diverting to the cold war 10 per cent of our
resources-$22,000,000,000 of a national income of
$220,000,000,000. Yet nothing has been done to
channel our activities to get the best results. There
has been a helter-skelter, selfish race. Again, although
the struggle for peace is dragging into its
fourth year and our economy strains under evergrowing
commitments, we still lack a global strategy
to guide the use of our resources. This global strategy
is our most pressing immediate need.
Its essence must lie in pacing ourselves vis-a-vis
the Soviets. In the absence of settlement, there are
two alternatives. Today's attrition may simmer
indefinitely or it may boil to a relatively quick showdown,
perhaps in a few years.
For which of these courses are we to prepare?
Must we sprint to meet some fateful crisis by some X year? Should we steady down to a grueling marathon?
Until that is determined, a truly effective
foreign policy must continue to elude us. Much of
our resources must inevitably be wasted. Nor can
any of us-individuals, businessmen, cities or
states-know how to manage our affairs.
If there is serious danger that war may be
forced upon us in a few years, then the program
now contemplated for rebuilding the defenses
of Western Europe is recklessly slow. Here at
home, a peacetime equivalent of the War Production
Board should already be functioning, curtailing
the least essential uses for materials in shortest
supply to accelerate urgent needs. Grave deficits
exist which would weaken us sorely were we plunged
into war-a shortage of housing and storage; too few freight ears. Electric power is so scarce that
aluminum production is curtailed. At current rates
of buying, stockpiles of some strategic materials
would take years to fill, yet many of these materials
continue to be consumed for relatively nonessential
purposes.
On the other hand, the longer the cold war seems
likely to endure, the more mindful we must be not
to wreck ourselves by overspending. Too many commitments
abroad tend to weaken us. Many were
embarked upon hastily, without awareness of those
which were to follow.
All our commitments should now be re-examined
to determine where a decision in the. peacemaking
can be reached, and at what cost. If a greater outlay
of resources will break the stalemate on any front,
let us "pour it on," instead of merely perpetuating
the deadlock through ineffectual dribbles of aid. If,
however, no decision is possible, let us cut expenditures
and insist that these nations do more for themselves.
Such a policy may provide rude awakenings
for governments now content to coast on American
aid, but this country is not strong enough to hold up
the rest of the world indefinitely. 
"Won't these countries turn communist if we do
that?" protested one official recently, when I made
this suggestion.
My reply was, "We do not have enough to buy
the political convictions of other nations, and
shouldn't try." Let us not be blackjacked by threats
to "join Russia." If any people are ready to reduce
themselves to tbe Soviet level, we cannot save
them. We can help only those with the will to save
themselves.
Some cry, "We cannot set conditions as the price
of American aid." An enduring partnership requires
a clear understanding not simply of what we will do
but of what others must do. The essential thing is
to fix our ultimate objectives, so we have our own
standards for determining what we must do first,
what can be put off and what we must insist that
other nations do. Let us not pay the fiddler while
others call the tunes.
Whatever course is settled upon will involve risks.
Let no one be deceived on that point. Our problem
is to organize these risks with prudent calculation,
so we can rid the future of fear, as far as possible.
Uncertainty feeds upon itself with curious effects.
For example, one of our largest manufacturers-
himself a part of the Government-asked me why
people were afraid to invest in his company's stock
when its cash assets alone were worth as much as its
total stock was selling for. In addition, the company
owned plants and property worth twice as much
more. "Our assets are three times the price of our
stock," he complained.
Decision, decision, decision-I cannot stress its
necessity too strongly. All business is now on a fear-to-
fear basis. We know the world wants and can use
all we and others can produce. Nor is the world as
poor as it thinks it is. Everywhere activity is choked
back by clawing uncertainty. In 1944, in the face of
general forecasts of a calamitous postwar depression,
I predicted an unparalleled "adventure in prosperity"
after the war. That prosperity will gain new
impetus with a decision in the peacemaking.
I fully appreciate the difficulties. No previous
President or Congress has faced a more torturous
choice. But it is better to pace ourselves, knowing
the risks being run, than to demoralize ourselves by
trying to move in conflicting directions.
As late as 1889, the Army and Navy together cost
each American about $1.25 a year. Last year the per
capita appropriations for defense ran to $100, plus
another $30 for foreign aid. Are we to continue to
devote so large a proportion of our resources to unproductive
armaments and foreign aid or even, as some
suggest, to spend more? Then we must pay for it by
expecting less at home. Much more could be done in
the peace-waging, without harm, if the American
people accept the moderation and, where necessary,
sacrifices to free these resources. Without such
organized self-restraint, what the cold war is now
taking could wreck UB. YOU can drive an automobile
at fifty miles an hour with safety if you keep your
eyes on the road. You can kill yourself at ten miles
an hour, blindfolded.
As long as the cold war rages, we shall be struggling
to balance military readiness to deter aggression
with economic betterment, our obligations
abroad with necessary restraints at home. The
stakes are too immense to trust to improvisation or
luek. There should be one body continuously deliberating
over the whole of the peace-waging, adjusting
that balance to changing conditions and our
evolving peace strategy.
Toward the end of the war I suggested to President
Roosevelt that some such central "think pot"
be set up. It was my conviction that America's
greatest power in the peacemaking would stem from
the fact that the United States would come out of
the war the one great reservoir of productive resources
in the world.
"For at least three, maybe five years after the
war," I told the President, "the whole world will
be crying for things. Not money, not loans, not
trade preferences-production is what will count.
We won't be able to give everyone all they want,
but by using our production wisely we can lead the
world in writing a durable peace. The important
thing is to know what policies are necessary for
peace; then bring our productive power to bear upon those
aims. An over-all peace strategy and our
production should go hand in hand."
My plan was to create two bodies.
In Europe, a Supreme Reconstruction
Council would screen the demands of
all European nations, seeing what they
could do for themselves. At home, I
proposed an Advisory Peace Council to
the President, consisting of the secretaries
of State, War, Navy and Treasury;
Harry Hopkins; the beads of the
Foreign Economic Administration and
Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion,
plus a small, fact-finding staff,
headed by a counselor who enjoyed
Roosevelt's personal confidence. This
council was to recommend peace policy
to the President; also bow our production
was to be rationed-what had to
be kept at home, what should go here
and there in the world to implement the
peacemaking.
Roosevelt liked the idea. He wanted
the body enlarged by several persons
not burdened with official duties, and
spoke of making James F. Byrnes
chairman, and Judge Samuel I. Rosenman
counselor. Since Judge Rosenman
was in Europe, creation of the council
was put off until he returned. While in
London on a mission for the President,
I told Judge Rosenman about the plan.
He was enthusiastic. A day or two later
we were awakened to be told the President
had died. That was four years ago.
Some such central "think" body, or
General Staff for Peace, is even more
essential today.
Nowhere in history can be found a
precedent for what the American people
are undertaking - a great nation of
147,000.000 changing its habits while
maintaining its freedoms. This transformation
is bound to stir fierce inner
torments among us, so deep is the conflict
between our normally relaxed ways
and the state of semiwar which now
prevails. There must be some one place
where these torments can be reconciled.
Two dangers will clutch at us constantly-
we may destroy our liberties
by militarizing American life or by unduly
strengthening government. Both
these perils can be avoided through
wise consideration of the factor of time.
Take our system of free economic enterprise
as an illustration. If I learned
anything while at college, it was the law
of supply and demand. My professsor
George R. Newcomb, never tired of
reiterating, "High prices adjust themselves by stimulating production, lessening
demand and increasing the use
of substitutes. Low prices adjust them
selves by raising consumption, decreasing production and lessening the use of
substitutes.' Only once in my business
career did I try to outsmart the law of
supply and demand-when Brazil undertook to maintain the price of coffee.
I joined in the scheme with the cleverest
coffee merchants. The more coffee we
bought, the more was produced. It was
my worst financial reverse and nearly
wrecked the Brazilian Government.
As chairman of the War Industries
Board in World War I, though,
learned one qualification to the law of
supply and demand-its adjustments
take time. Because, in war, time means
lives and suffering, we cannot wait
upon supply and demand to adjust
themselves. And so the Government
steps in with priorities and other controls
to see that first things are produced
first, and that necessities are
equitably shared.
Confronting, as now, a continuous
threat of war, we cannot trust blindly
to a self-regulating economy. How close
or how far-off war lurks must be
weighed constantly. Where the gap in 
time between our peaceful ways and
what war requires is wide enough to
imperil our security, the Government
should narrow that gap. Beyond that,
things should be left alone. regimentation for the sake of regimentation.
Such a policy requires a constant,
vigilant inventory of our resources and
commitments. It emphasizes anew the
necessity for a decision on pacing ourselves.
Unless those at the pushbuttons
of government are thoroughly competent
and clear on the time schedule
against which we are racing, they cannot
know when to intervene or when
to let supply and demand work themselves
out.
This same principle of timing can
guide us through all the adjustments to
be made, not alone economic ones. Until
there is peace, constant inroads by
the Government upon the individual
must he expected. That is the nature of
readiness for war. These encroachments
can he minimized by pacing ourselves,
weighing the risk to peace against what
would have to be done to overcome that
risk. Should certain restraints threaten
our liberties unduly, we may prefer to
live with the danger. But then we shall
know it. Let us not fool ourselves. Let
not the Government fool the people.
Whatever controls are imposed must
he promptly removed when peace does
come. Congress has been jealous of its
right to declare war. Congress should he
equally jealous of its right to declare
peace, thus terminating whatever extraordinary
powers are given the President
for the cold war.
The traditional walls between military
and civil activity lie crumbled. To
keep from being engulfed by preparations
against war-by its conscriptions,
its taxes, its regimentations-we must
organize something equivalent to those
former walls. The raging "Battle of
Washington,' as newspapermen like to
call it, is largely a search, bitter and
frantic because of the immense stakes,
for a new dividing line between war
and peace. That line can he found only
through decision, by establishing a
compact strategy board, charged with
the peacemaking as a whole, calculating
all risks and needs, subject to the President's,
approval. Efforts have been
made to get the National Security
Council to do this. But the make-up of
the council needs broadening. Nor is it
organized to come to effective decision.
With such a central body to alert us, we
could limit to a minimum the disturbances
to our political and economic system
and to our daily lives-at least until
the alarm went off.
Wherever one looks in the world
there rages this same struggle to fence
off war and peace. It is the agony of the
United Nations. It is the crux of the
problem of atomic energy. Remarkably,
the United States and Soviet Russia occupy
opposite extremes of this guns-versus-
butter scale. In the Soviet Union,
"defense" against war comes first,
with the people subsisting on what little
is left. The result is a military power
grotesquely out of proportion to low
living levels. In the United States, the
emphasis on "butter" has produced
wonderfully high living levels, dangerously
out of proportion to our low mobilized
power. If both these extremes
could be moderated-with the Russian
people improving their living standards-
a peaceful balance might yet be
found between the two giants.
In this article I have not attempted
to explore in full the interrelationships
of war and peace, nor all the adjustments
being forced upon us as a nation.
I might summarize our problem
with this generalization: what once we
took for granted must now be consciously
thought through. That windfall
of youth, time, is gone. No longer
able to trust to luck that things will
work themselves out, we must deliberately
determine our national interest.
No government can he strong abroad
and weak at home. And this will prove
our ultimate trial. To guard against aggression
we must strengthen government.
Will we use this stronger government
to achieve "a more perfect
union" among ourselves? Or will we
make it a mere prize of power to divide
us in the struggle to control it?
How well or how poorly we shall be
faring will he easily measured in how we
cope with inflation or what is now called
"disinflation." Most persons think of
inflation as a problem in economics or
money. It is far more a matter of national
character. Inflation is the result
of each segment of society putting its
own selfish interest ahead of the national
interest. The inflation that has
racked the country since the war's end
had its start in the price-control law of
1942, which let wages run free and farm
prices rise to 110 per cent of parity.
That law legalized inflation.
Aggravating these mistakes when the
war was over, taxes were reduced and
controls thrown off too soon. How little
was learned was demonstrated anew
last year when political competition decreed
another cut in taxes in the face
of growing expenditures for the cold
war, which necessitated keeping higher
taxes.
Americans were shocked when the
Soviet government slashed the value of
the ruble from ten to one. The bulk of
the savings of the Russian people were
wiped out. A whole generation over
forty years of age was discarded to the
rubble heap. Yet, in a less ruthless way,
that is what our own Government has
been doing-steadily lessening the
value of all savings, pensions and the
Uke. Shortly before his death. Mayor
Fiorello LaGuardia sat down with me
and figured how much the pensions he
bad accumulated in forty years of government
service were worth. Their real
purchasing value came to one third of
the nominal value.
It is becoming ever more difficult for
a person to care for himself and his family
independently. If earnings are to be
devalued by printing more money in
the incessant scramble for higher wages,
higher profits, higher prices, higher
pensions, higher fees of every kind, the
moral basis of society will he destroyed.
All of us will become dependent upon
the Mother State. But upon whom is
the Mother State to lean? Only through
greater production can there he more
to share, and that requires not more,
but stable, purchasing power, so that
past, present and future earnings have
like value.
A young man I know, on returning
from Europe, remarked, "If I were a
poet, I would write an Ode to a Stable
Government. It is really a thing of
heauty and a joy forever." In Germany
there is no government and the
people do not even have a voice. In
other countries, where the government
trembles all life trembles. Today the
United States has the most stable-
most beautiful-government in the
world. We dare not lose it. Only
through stable government can we adjust
to our changed world and remain
capable of preventing war. Only
through stable government can we
even hope to reach a settlement with
Russia. Only stable government can
chain the fears which prey on us. Only
stable government can give value to
the future.
America has been termed the last
hope of the rest of the world. It is also
our own last resort. For us there can
be no Lend-Lease. Peace is our goal-
a peace of self-respect for the entire
world. I believe we can get it by pacing
ourselves so as not to dissipate our
resources and by uniting for the common
good instead of dividing for selfish
advantage. To adjust to America's
new position as the decision point of the
free world will strain our democratic
institutions to their utmost. We shall
not fail if we remember that all the
material baubles for which we strive
have no luster other than that which
is reflected from freedom's light.
Banded in common disciplines to preserve
our liberties, we can meet whatever
the future will bring. 


